

     Contents

     Contributors xvii
     Symbols and abbreviations xxi

 1   Trauma                                 1
 2   Oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer   61
 3   Surgical dermatology                   143
 4   Salivary glands                        177
 5   Orthognathic surgery                   211
 6   Craniofacial surgery                   289
 7   Cleft lip and palate                   315
 8   Aesthetics                             351
 9   The temporomandibular joint            377
10   Surgical principles and oral surgery   397
11   Oral medicine                          453
12   Eponyms in OMFS                        513
13   Other useful facts                     521


          Symbols and abbreviations
%         cross reference                  CCF         congestive cardiac failure
         bomb (controversial topic)       CL          cleft lip
~         approximately                    CLAPA       Cleft Lip and Palate
#         fracture                                     Association
♀         female                           CLP         cleft lip and palate
♂         male                             cM          cutaneous melanoma
d         decreased                        CMV         cytomegalovirus
i         increased                        CNS         central nervous system
l         leading to                       CO2         carbon dioxide
M         website                          COPD        chronic obstructive pulmonary
                                                       disease
±         with or without
                                           COX         cyclooxygenase
2D        two-​dimensional
                                           CP          cleft palate
3D        three-​dimensional
                                           CRP         C-​reactive protein
ACE       angiotensin-​converting enzyme
                                           CSF         cerebrospinal fluid
ACE-​27   Adult Co-​morbidity Evaluation
                                           CT          computed tomography
ADA       American Dental Association
                                           CTA         computed tomography
ADP       adenosine diphosphate                        angiography
AJCC      American Joint Committee         CTD         connective tissue disorder
          on Cancer
                                           CXR         chest X-​ray
ALARP     as low as reasonably possible
                                           DCIA        deep circumflex iliac artery
ALP       alkaline phosphatase
                                           DM          diabetes mellitus
ANB       point A to nasion to point B
                                           DUSS        duplex ultrasound scanning
AP        anteroposterior
                                           DVT         deep venous thrombosis
ARDS      acute respiratory distress
          syndrome                         EAM         external auditory meatus
ASA       American Association of          EAT         extra-​alveolar time
          Anaesthesiologists               EBV         Epstein–​Barr virus
ATLS      advanced trauma life support     ECG         electrocardiogram
AVPU      Alert, Voice, Pain,              ELND        elective lymph node dissection
          Unresponsive                     EM          erythema multiforme
BAD       British Association of           END         elective neck dissection
          Dermatologists
                                           ENT         ear, nose, and throat
BCC       basal cell carcinoma
                                           EORTC       European Organisation for
BCLP      bilateral cleft lip and palate               Research Treatment of Cancer
BDA       British Dental Association       ESR         erythrocyte sedimentation rate
BLCP      bilateral cleft lip and palate   ET          endotracheal
BMI       body mass index                  ETT         endotracheal tube
BP        blood pressure                   EUA         examination under anaesthesia
BSSO      bilateral sagittal split         EUT         Eustachian tube
          osteotomy
                                           FACT-​HNS   Functional Assessment of
CAD       computer-​aided design                       Cancer Therapy, H + N Scale
CAM       computer-​aided manufacturing    FBC         full blood count
CBCT      cone beam computed               FDG         fluorodeoxyglucose
          tomography
xxii        Symbols and abbreviations


       FESS       functional endoscopic sinus       MRA        magnetic resonance
                  surgery                                      angiography
       FGFR       fibroblast growth factor          MRI        magnetic resonance imaging
                  receptor                          MRONJ      medicine-​related
       FNA        fine needle aspiration                       osteonecrosis of the jaw
       FNAB       fine needle aspiration biopsy     MRSA       methicillin-​resistant
       FNAC       fine needle aspiration cytology              Staphylococcus aureus
       FRCS       Fellowship of the Royal           MTHFR      methylenetetrahydrofolate
                  Colleges of Surgeons                         reductase
       FTSG       full-​thickness skin graft        NAM        nasoalveolar moulding
       GA         general anaesthesia/​             ND         neck dissection
                  anaesthetic                       NG         nasogastric
       GCS        Glasgow Coma Scale                NGT        nasogastric tube
       GDC        General Dental Council            NICE       National Institute for Health
       GDP        general dental practitioner                  and Care Excellence
       GMC        General Medical Council           NMSC       non-​melanoma skin cancer
       GMP        general medical practitioner      NO         nitrous oxide
       GPP        gingivoperiosteoplasty            NSAID      non-​steroidal
                                                               anti-​inflammatory drug
       HADS       Hospital Anxiety and
                  Depression Scale                  O2         oxygen
       HBO        hyperbaric oxygen                 OCP        oral contraceptive pill
       HIV        human immunodeficiency virus      OH         oral hygiene
       HLA        human leucocyte antigen           OHI        oral hygiene instruction
       HPV        human papilloma virus             OM         occipitomental
       HRQOL      health-​related quality of life   OME        otitis media with effusion
       HSV        herpes simplex virus              OMENS      orbital distortion, mandibular
                                                               hypoplasia, ear anomaly,
       ICP        intracranial pressure                        nerve involvement, soft tissue
       ID         inferior dental                              deficiency
       IDB        inferior dental bundle            OMFS       oral and maxillofacial surgery
       IE         infective endocarditis            ON         osteonecrosis
       Ig         immunoglobulin                    ONJ        osteonecrosis of the jaws
       IHD        ischaemic heart disease           OPG/​OPT   orthopantomogram
       IJV        internal jugular vein             ORIF       open reduction internal
       IM         intramuscular                                fixation
       IMF        intermaxillary fixation           ORN        osteoradionecrosis
       INR        international normalized ratio    OSA        obstructive sleep apnoea
       IRM        intermediate restorative          PA         posteroanterior
                  material                          PCR        polymerase chain reaction
       IU         international units               PE         pulmonary embolus
       IV         intravenous                       PEG        percutaneous endoscopic
       LA         local anaesthesia/​anaesthetic               gastrostomy
       LMA        laryngeal mask airway             PET        positron emission tomography
       LMWH       low-​molecular-​weight heparin    PMOL       potentially malignant
       LN         lymph node                                   oral lesion
       LP         lichen planus                     PRP        platelet-​rich plasma
       MAPK       mitogen-​activated                PSA        pleomorphic salivary adenoma
                  protein kinase                    PTH        parathyroid hormone
       MDT        multidisciplinary team            QOL        quality of life
       MI         myocardial infarction             RAPD       relative afferent papillary defect
                                            Symbols and abbreviations                 xxiii

RCT     randomized controlled trial         SPECT   single photon emission
RED     rigid external distractor                   tomography
REM     rapid eye movement                  SS      Sjögren’s syndrome
RNA     ribonucleic acid                    TB      tuberculosis
RND     radical neck dissection             TED     thromboembolic deterrent
RT      radiotherapy                        TGF     transforming growth factor
SALT    speech and language therapy/​       TMJ     temporomandibular joint
        therapist                           TMJDS   temporomandibular joint
SARPE   surgically assisted rapid palatal           dysfunction syndrome
        expansion                           TNF     tumour necrosis factor
SC      subcutaneous                        TNM     tumour, lymph nodes, distant
SCC     squamous cell carcinoma                     metastases system
SCM     sternocleidomastoid muscle          UCLP    unilateral cleft lip and palate
SDCEP   Scottish Dental Clinical            UICC    Union for International Cancer
        Effectiveness Programme                     Control
SEND    selective elective neck             USS     ultrasound scanning
        dissection                          UV      ultraviolet
SMAS    superficial                         VCF     velocardiofacial syndrome
        musculo-​aponeurotic system         VPI     velopharyngeal incompetence
SMV     submentovertex                      VSS     vertical subsigmoid osteotomy
SNA     point S to nasion to point A        VZV     varicella zoster virus
SNB     sentinel node biopsy/​point S       WHO     World Health Organization
        to nasion to point B
                                            WLE     wide local excision
SND     selective neck dissection
                                            ZN      Ziehl–​Neelsen




    2    Chapter      Trauma


        Introduction
        Maxillofacial trauma can affect any part of the head and neck and frequently
        occurs in conjunction with other injuries, particularly ophthalmic and neuro-
        surgical. Over the last several decades there has been a change in the aeti-
        ology of this form of trauma in the UK. Prior to seatbelt legislation and
        motor vehicle safety developments, such as airbags, there were large num-
        bers of high-​energy road traffic accidents with drivers and passengers sus-
        taining injuries from unrestrained impacts on dashboards or windscreens.
        Such injuries are now far less common. There is, however, a large work-
        load from injuries as a result of interpersonal violence and, with an ageing
        population, an increasing number of elderly patients sustaining injuries from
        falls. This pattern of injury is mirrored in most of Western Europe and
        North America. In some parts of the world, e.g. Asia, road traffic injuries
        still predominate.
           Following the development of internal fixation, popularized in the 980s
        with the introduction of titanium, miniplate open reduction and internal
        fixation is now established as a routine approach to the management of
        displaced facial fractures.
                                                     Initial assessment          3


Initial assessment
History: the importance of the mechanism of injury and medical and
drug histories
The history of any injury is important and indirectly provides a guide not
only to its treatment, but also the potential surgical outcome. Important
factors relate to the patient and nature of the injury itself.
Patient factors
• Medical history: details of general health and medications taken should
  be sought in case they influence treatment pathways or provision of
  care, e.g. COVID-​9.
• Social history: a significant proportion of patients with facial injuries
  have underlying social problems with housing, and the recreational
  use of drugs and alcohol. Patients with addictions to alcohol or
  recreational drugs are frequently malnourished and can be relatively
  immunocompromised. Consideration should be given to whether
  domestic violence is involved in the mechanism of injury.
Injury factors
• Sharp or blunt trauma: exclusively sharp trauma produces an incised
   wound, with the nature of the injury indicating if there is likely to be
   contamination of the wound, e.g. glass.
• Energy transfer of trauma: although energy transfer is a concept
   originally used to understand ballistic trauma, it is relevant to all types
   of injury. High-​energy transfer is exemplified by an object that is either
   fast moving or has a large inherent mass colliding with an object and
   stopping. Kinetic energy is transferred to that object. This occurs in road
   traffic accidents where the mass of the patient’s head moves rapidly and
   then stops. It is also the case with blunt trauma imparted by an object,
   such as a baseball bat or the force from a kick. By contrast, the energy
   transfer in a punch is lower, as a fist has less mass and moves more
   slowly.
• Contamination of wounds: cuts with knives are frequently clean and
   non-​contaminated. Lacerations are often contaminated with particles
   from the surface that have produced the injury and often require
   thorough debridement under general anaesthesia (GA).
4



    4    Chapter      Trauma


        ‘Advanced trauma life support’ and
        facial trauma
        Life-​threatening conditions
        • Airway with cervical spine control: if the airway is compromised in
          facial injuries it is frequently due to:
          • debris obscuring the airway, such as blood, and fragments of teeth
             and bone;
          • oedema in the pharyngeal tissues as result of injury;
          • a grossly displaced mandibular injury resulting in lack of tongue
             support and secondary obstruction of the airway is possible, although
             in the conscious patient rarely seen.
        • Breathing.
        • Circulation: the head and neck has a rich blood supply. This is beneficial
          in soft tissue and fracture healing, but can cause problems with acute
          haemorrhage. Torrential haemorrhage is likely to arise from:
          • the maxillary artery and pterygoid venous plexus in grossly displaced
             maxillary fractures;
          • branches of the carotid artery and tributaries of the internal jugular
             vein in penetrating neck trauma.
          • Although head and neck haemorrhage can result in hypovolaemic
             shock, the shocked patient with facial injuries must have all other
             potential causes of blood loss investigated and excluded as appropriate.
        • Disability.
        • Exposure.
        • Head injury: cerebral injury is frequently associated with facial injury.
          Head injury in the presence of severe facial injuries may be milder
          than expected as, to some extent, the face acts as a ‘crumple zone’
          protecting the cranial contents from injury. Patients should be assessed
          using the Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS). Many patients with facial injury
          will have consumed alcohol or drugs that can mask the symptoms of
          head injury. This needs to be borne in mind when assessing the patient.
          There needs to be a low threshold for computed tomography (CT)
          scanning to exclude intracranial injury or mass effects.
        • <C>ABCDE has superseded ABC (catastrophic haemorrhage, airway
          with spinal protection, breathing, circulation, disability (neurological) and
          exposure and environment). People with suspected major trauma are
          usually taken to the nearest major trauma centre for management.
        •	The CRASH-​2 trial showed that tranexamic acid reduces death rates in
          the trauma patient who is bleeding or at risk of bleeding.
        Sight-​threatening conditions
        The eyes lie in the centre of the face surrounded inferiorly by the maxilla,
        laterally by the zygoma, and medially by the frontal, nasal, and lacrimal bones.
        Orbital trauma is frequently associated with ocular injury. All patients with a
        suspected orbital injury should have their visual acuity documented at their
        time of initial assessment. Loss of visual acuity should raise the question of
        whether there is intraocular injury, primary optic nerve injury, or i pressure
        within the orbit leading to secondary injury of the optic nerve. Retrobulbar
        haemorrhage is an example of a condition that causes acute compression of
        the optic nerve. (See % Initial management of ocular injuries, p. 14.)
                                      Priority setting in polytrauma                  5


Priority setting in polytrauma
Multidisciplinary considerations
Life-​or sight-​threatening facial injuries should be treated immediately. Facial
lacerations and unstable mandibular fractures should be treated early ideally,
within 24h. Most other bony facial injury can be treated on a delayed basis.
The delay involved is dependent upon the amount of facial oedema present.
Mid-​face and orbital injuries should either be treated before the onset of
facial oedema (in the first 24–​48h) or after facial oedema has settled. The
decision of definitive timing to treat injuries is also affected by other injuries,
and the need to treat major chest, abdominal, pelvic, limb and head trauma
(M https://​www.nice.org.uk/​guidance/​ng39/​chapter/​Context).
Imaging
Polytrauma patients are often immobilized or supine due to potential spinal
injuries.
   Plain film radiographs for facial injuries include:
• Occipitomental (OM) views.
• Orthopantomogram (OPG).
• Posteroanterior (PA) mandible.
These views require the patient to be upright. However, in a patient with
multiple injuries this is not possible. If the patient cannot stand and has clin-
ical indicators that suggest significant bony facial injury, a fine cut (0.5mm)
CT scan of the head and neck should be undertaken. With the advent
of 64-​slice spiral CT scanners in most trauma units, this should be easily
achievable. Every effort should be made to incorporate facial imaging into
trauma protocols. If a patient is having a CT of their head and cervical spine,
they should have simultaneous imaging of the face.
6



    6    Chapter      Trauma


        ‘How to do’ emergency procedures
        Airway management
        Except in the management of battlefield trauma, where control of massive
        haemorrhage from extremities may supervene, the airway always takes first
        priority and should be managed in association with protection of the cer-
        vical spine. Airway management can be summarized as follows:
        • Clear debris from the airway.
        • Posture—​in the absence of associated spinal injuries it is appropriate
           to sit the patient up. Patients with grossly displaced mandibular injuries,
           such as those from gunshot wounds, should be allowed to sit leaning
           forward so that the tongue and any debris from the oral cavity is
           allowed to fall away from the airway.
        • Neck extension and jaw thrust also helps to clear the airway, although
           neck extension is not permitted in the case of suspected injuries to the
           cervical spine.
        • A Guedel airway can be used to help maintain the airway temporarily in
           a patient with reduced consciousness (Fig. .). The majority of these
           patients will need a definitive airway, i.e. one in which there is a tracheal
           cuff to prevent debris escaping into the lungs. The best example of this
           is the endotracheal tube (ETT; Fig. .2), the establishment of which
           should be the first choice for managing the compromised airway in
           the trauma patient. If it is not possible, other surgical options exist for
           establishing an airway.
        Vomiting in the immobilized patient
        Patients immobilized on a spinal board who vomit are in danger of aspir-
        ation, as they cannot sit up to clear their airway. If such a patient is about to
        vomit, they should immediately be turned on their side on the spinal board.
        Surgical airways
        An emergency surgical airway can be achieved in one of two ways.
        Needle cricothyroidotomy
        This provides a temporary surgical airway. In essence, it supplies the pa-
        tient with oxygen (O2), but without a definitive surgical airway there is an
        inevitable build-​up of carbon dioxide (CO2), which limits the usefulness of
        this technique.
        Technique
        •	Ensure an O2 supply and tubing is available.
        • Place patient in a supine position.
        • Assemble a 2-​or 4-​gauge needle with a 5mL syringe.
        • Surgically prepare the neck using antiseptic swabs.
        • Identify the cricothyroid membrane, between the cricoid cartilage and
          the thyroid cartilage. Stabilize the trachea with the thumb and forefinger
          of one hand to prevent lateral movement of the trachea during
          performance of the procedure.
                                 ‘How to do’ emergency procedures                      7




Fig. . Initial airway management of multiple facial injuries with a Guedel airway.




Fig. .2 Initial airway management of multiple facial injuries with an ETT.
8



    8    Chapter      Trauma

        • Puncture the skin in the midline with the needle attached to the syringe,
          directly over the cricothyroid membrane. A small incision with a No. 
          blade may facilitate passage of the needle through the skin.
        • Direct the needle at a 45° angle inferiorly, while applying negative
          pressure to the syringe, and carefully insert the needle through the
          lower half of the cricothyroid membrane. Aspiration of air signifies
          entry into the tracheal lumen.
        •	Remove the syringe and attach the O2 tubing over the needle hub.
          Intermittent ventilation can be achieved by occluding the open hole cut
          into the O2 tubing with your thumb for s and releasing it for 4s.
        Cricothyroidotomy
        Surgical cricothyroidotomy provides a definitive surgical airway. It is a
        procedure that can be performed extremely rapidly and, in an emer-
        gency, any rigid tube with a hollow lumen can used. Specially designed
        cricothyroidotomy tubes are available.
        Technique
        • Place the patient in a supine position with the neck in a neutral position.
           Palpate the thyroid notch, cricothyroid membrane, and the sternal
           notch for orientation. Surgically prepare and anaesthetize the area (if
           there is time and the patient is conscious).
        • Stabilize the thyroid cartilage with the left hand. Make a transverse
           skin incision over the cricothyroid membrane. Carefully incise through
           the membrane. Insert the scalpel handle into the incision and rotate it
           90° to open the airway. Insert an appropriately sized, cuffed ETT or
           tracheostomy tube into the cricothyroid membrane incision, directing
           the tube inferiorly into the trachea. Inflate the cuff and ventilate the
           patient (Fig. .3 and Fig. .4).
        Conscious patients with a compromised airway will often shows signs of
        agitation and will not want to lie supine as this causes the tongue to fall back
        into the airway. There may also be stridor present and signs of i respiratory
        effort. Hypoxia may reveal itself by:
        • Agitated patient.
        • Varying level of consciousness.
        • Inappropriate behaviour.
        • Signs of airway compromise.
        • Combination of the above signs.
        Spinal immobilization
        Patients with suspected spinal injuries or patients who are unconscious
        should be immobilized in the in-​line spinal position. The cervical spine can
        be immobilized at the same time as establishing an airway.
        Moving the patient
        Multiple-​injury patients should be immobilized on a spinal board for the
        purposes of transfer.
        Intravenous access
        Intravenous (IV) access should be established with two large-​bore can-
        nulas (brown 4-​or grey 6-​gauge) at two peripheral sites, such as the
        antecubital fossae.
                              ‘How to do’ emergency procedures   9




Fig. .3 Cricothyroidotomy: surface landmarks.




Fig. .4 Cricothyroidotomy: airway secured with an ETT.
10



     10    Chapter      Trauma

          Facial bleeding
          Sitting the patient up not only improves the airway and breathing, but also
          reduces venous pressure with a consequent beneficial effect on bleeding
          from injury. Most facial bleeding from soft tissue injuries can be controlled
          with direct pressure. Torrential haemorrhage from mid-​facial fractures is
          not so easily controlled. Anterior and posterior nasal packing is used to
          staunch haemorrhage from the nose. It is often also helpful to prop the
          mouth open, impacting the maxilla against the skull base and compressing
          bleeding vessels. Hypovolaemia may be clinically apparent by:
          •	Tachycardia.
          •	Tachypnoea.
          • Peripheral shutdown.
          • Anxiety.
          • Narrowing of pulse pressure.
          • Hypotension is a late sign of hypovolaemia and a normotensive patient
             should not be assumed to be necessarily normovolaemic.
          The first priority in the presence of appreciable facial haemorrhage always
          remains protection of the airway.
          Bleeding from the neck
          • Bleeding from penetrating neck trauma is potentially serious.
          •	The neck is divided into three zones:
            • zone I (base)—​thoracic inlet to cricoid cartilage (highest mortality);
            • zone II (mid-​portion)—​cricoid cartilage to angle of mandible;
            • zone III (superior)—​angle of mandible to skull base.

          External haemorrhage
          If the haemorrhage is external, then local temporary measures such as
          isolating the bleeding point if clearly identifiable with a haemostat are ap-
          propriate. Bleeding from the tissues overlying the mandible from the facial
          artery can be controlled by pressure. Bleeding from the major vessels in
          the neck, such as the internal jugular vein, cannot be so easily controlled by
          pressure and will need prompt surgical exploration.
          Concealed haemorrhage
          Penetrating neck trauma from sharp implements such as knives can cause
          internal bleeding from damage to the great vessels without signs of external
          haemorrhage. This is potentially serious, as the consequences of rapid neck
          swelling can be fatal. Patients showing signs of neck swelling or patients who
          show signs of haemodynamic instability should have the airway assessed
          and protected if required and either urgent surgical exploration or imaging
          if time allows. Bear in mind that penetrating neck injuries may have neck
          vessel sources of bleeding or more distant thoracic sources.
                           ‘How to do’ emergency procedures               11


Imaging
• CT head and neck with consideration of inclusion of upper thorax with
  contrast.
• Consider CT angiography.
• Chest X-​ray (CXR).
• Computed tomography angiography (CTA).
• Conventional angiography.
• Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)/​magnetic resonance angiography
  (MRA).
• Ultrasound scanning (USS).
12



     12    Chapter      Trauma


          Initial management of head injuries
          Patients with head injuries can initially be assessed using the ‘Alert, Voice,
          Pain, Unresponsive’ (AVPU) system before formal GCS assessment.
          AVPU
          A Alert.
          V Voice, able to respond to verbal command.
          P Does not respond to verbal command, will respond to pain.
          U Unresponsive.
          The first priority is to prevent secondary brain injury from inadequate cere-
          bral circulation.
          • Airway:
            • provide 00% O2;
            • consider intubation in the presence of hypoxia, hypercapnia,
               respiratory distress, or in a patient unable to protect their own airway.
          • Breathing: assess and treat chest injuries.
          • Circulation:
            • evaluate and treat hypovolaemia;
            • identify and control haemorrhage;
            • use isotonic fluids (crystalloid vs colloid controversy, usually 0.9%
               saline, increasing use of permissive hypotension which has been
               shown to improve outcomes).
          Glasgow Coma Scale
          d level of consciousness as assessed by the GCS score:
          Best eye response (E)
          There are four grades starting with the most severe:
          • Grade : no eye opening.
          • Grade 2: eye opening in response to pain (patient responds to pressure
            on fingernail bed; if this does not elicit a response, supraorbital and
            sternal pressure or rub may be used).
          • Grade 3: eye opening to speech (not to be confused with an awaking of
            a sleeping person; such patients receive a score of 4, not 3).
          • Grade 4: eyes opening spontaneously.
          Best verbal response (V)
          There are five grades, starting with the most severe:
          • Grade : no verbal response.
          • Grade 2: incomprehensible sounds (moaning, but no words).
          • Grade 3: inappropriate words (random or exclamatory articulated
            speech, but no conversational exchange).
          • Grade 4: confused (patient responds to questions coherently, but there
            is some disorientation and confusion).
          • Grade 5: orientated (patient responds coherently and appropriately to
            questions such as name and age, etc.).
                            Initial management of head injuries                13


Best motor response (M)
There are six grades, starting with the most severe:
• Grade : no motor response.
• Grade 2: extension to pain (adduction of arm, internal rotation of
  shoulder, pronation of forearm, extension of wrist—​decerebrate
  response).
• Grade 3: abnormal flexion to pain (adduction of arm, internal rotation
  of shoulder, pronation of forearm, flexion of wrist—​decorticate
  response).
• Grade 4: flexion/​withdrawal to pain (flexion of elbow, supination of
  forearm, flexion of wrist when supraorbital pressure applied, pulls part
  of body away when nail bed pinched).
• Grade 5: localizes to pain (purposeful movements towards painful
  stimuli, e.g. hand crosses mid-​line and gets above clavicle when
  supraorbital pressure applied).
• Grade 6: obeys commands (patient carries out simple requests).
A fully conscious patient scores 5. A patient scoring less than 8 should be
considered to be in a coma and, as such, unable to protect their own airway.
The minimum score is 3.
Indication for computed tomography imaging in head injury
CT imaging should be performed in all patients with significant risk of an
intracranial injury:
• Moderate and severe head injuries or deteriorating GCS score.
•	Loss of consciousness.
• Amnesia.
• Focal neurological deficits.
• Suspected skull fractures or penetrating injury.
•	Large scalp haematomas and lacerations (>0cm).
• Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak and other signs of base of skull fractures.
14



     14    Chapter      Trauma


          Initial management of ocular injuries
          A high proportion of patients with orbital injuries will have coexisting ocular
          injuries. It is essential to make an initial basic assessment of ocular function.
          In a conscious patient, this should consist of an assessment of visual acuity
          using a pocket Snellen chart. If the patient cannot read the top line on the
          Snellen chart, then assessment is as follows:
          • Can the patient count fingers?
          • Can the patient see hand movement?
          • Has the patient any light perception?
          Relative afferent pupillary defect (RAPD) is an indication of damage to the
          visual system that is useful in an unconscious patient. It is assessed by the
          swinging light test in which a pen torch is alternatively shone into one eye
          and then the other. Swinging the torch from the normal eye to the affected
          eye results in bilateral pupillary dilatation (Marcus Gunn sign). The presence
          of a RAPD usually indicates damage to the retina or optic nerve.
             Directly examine the eye for the following clinical features:
          • Hyphaema: blood in anterior chamber.
          • Irregular pupil: sign of underlying ocular injury.
          • Constricted pupils (meiosis): consider coexisting opiate abuse.
          • Dilated pupil (mydriasis): suspect local trauma, optic nerve or retinal
             injury, rising intracranial pressure (ICP), or cocaine abuse (bilateral).
          Retrobulbar haemorrhage
          Retrobulbar haemorrhage is best thought of as an example of acute or-
          bital compression syndrome as a result of an intraconal bleed. The com-
          monest causes are orbital trauma or as a complication of orbital surgery.
          Haemorrhage causes i pressure within the orbit, reducing flow in the ret-
          inal artery (an anatomical end-​artery), which in turn leads to irreversible
          vascular changes within the optic nerve, resulting in visual loss. Consider
          retrobulbar haemorrhage if:
          • Tense proptosed eye: eye pushed forward under pressure compared
             with contralateral eye.
          • Ophthalmoplegic eye: no eye movement.
          • Acute reduction in visual acuity.
          • Chemosis and orbital pain.
          • RAPD.
          • Raised intraocular pressure.
          • Retinal signs:
             • papilloedema;
             • lack of central retinal artery pulsation;
             • pale optic disc (occurs late);
             • cherry red macula.

          Treatment of retrobulbar haemorrhage needs to be prompt in order to
          avoid permanent visual loss.
                          Initial management of ocular injuries                  15


Treatment options
Medical decompression
• Mannitol (osmotic diuretic) 20% 2g/​kg IV over 5min.
• Dexamethasone 8mg IV.
• Acetazolamide (carbonic anhydrase inhibitor, reduces production of
  aqueous humour), 500mg IV and then 000mg orally over 24h.
Surgical decompression
Lateral canthotomy and cantholysis.
Canthotomy technique
• Clean the area with sterile saline.
• Inject local anaesthetic (LA) into the lateral canthus.
• Apply a haemostat/​clamp with one side anterior and one side posterior
  to the lateral canthus and advance until the rim of the bony orbit is felt.
• Clamp for 30–​60s.
• Perform the lateral canthotomy by carefully cutting through the crushed,
  demarcated line to the orbital rim/​lateral fornix to avoid traumatizing
  the orbit.
Cantholysis technique
• Grasp lower eyelid with forceps and pull outwards/​downwards away
  from eye.
• Identify the canthal ligament by either inspection or palpation. Incise
  the inferior crus of the lateral canthal ligament with scissors to avoid
  traumatizing the orbit.
•	Recheck the orbit for reduction in intraorbital and intraocular pressure.
  If pressure is still high, dissect the superior limb of the canthal ligament
  in a similar fashion. Care should be taken to avoid any trauma to the
  lacrimal gland.
16



     16    Chapter      Trauma


          ‘First aid’, antibiotics, and tetanus
          Antibiotic usage
          Indications for prophylactic usage of antibiotics in trauma include:
          • Contaminated soft tissue injury.
          • Mandibular fractures which are compound to the mouth.
          • Surgical emphysema.
          The importance of prompt surgical debridement cannot be overempha-
          sized in the management of contaminated wounds and compound frac-
          tures. Without surgical debridement infection will eventually occur even
          with antibiotic prophylaxis. Antibiotic prophylaxis should therefore start
          promptly and continue until surgical debridement has occurred.
             In the case of grossly infected wounds and systemic signs, such as rigor,
          pyrexia, and tachycardia, antibiotics should continue for at least 5 days.
             The choice of antibiotic will depend upon local policy.
             Bite injuries should be covered with co-​amoxiclav.
             Antibiotic prophylaxis is no longer routinely recommended for patients
          with CSF leaks.
          Tetanus prophylaxis
          Consideration of tetanus prophylaxis depends upon the immunization
          status of the patient and the status of the wound (Table .).

          Table . Immunization status and wound type
          Immunization status       Wound type
                                    Clean wound           Tetanus prone
                                    Clean incised wound   Wound >6h old
                                    Superficial graze     Contact with soil, manure
                                                          Puncture wound
                                                          Infected wound
                                                          Devitalized tissue
                                                          Animal or human bite
          Last of 3-​dose course or Nil                   Nil
          reinforcing dose within                         Human tetanus
          last 0 years                                   immunoglobulin if high
                                                          contamination, e.g. stable
                                                          manure
          Last of 3-​dose course    Reinforcing dose of   Reinforcing dose of adsorbed
          or reinforcing dose       adsorbed tetanus      tetanus vaccine + human
          >0 years ago             vaccine               tetanus immunoglobulin
          Not immunized or          Full course of        Full course of adsorbed
          immunization status not   adsorbed tetanus      tetanus + human tetanus
          known with certainty                            immunoglobulin
                           ‘First aid’, antibiotics, and tetanus          17


Adsorbed tetanus vaccine
• Adsorbed tetanus vaccine is given as 0.5mL by deep subcutaneous (SC)
  or intramuscular (IM) injection into the deltoid or gluteal muscle.
• A full course of adsorbed tetanus vaccine consists of three doses of
  0.5mL at intervals of not less than 4 weeks.
•	Tetanus vaccine must not be given to anyone who has received a
  reinforcing dose in the preceding year.
• Patients with impaired immunity who suffer a tetanus-​prone wound
  may not respond to vaccine and may therefore require anti-​tetanus
  immunoglobulin in addition.
Human tetanus immunoglobulin for prophylaxis
• Human tetanus immunoglobulin is given as 250 IU in mL by IM
   injection into the deltoid or gluteal region.
• If more than 24h have elapsed since injury, or there is risk of heavy
   contamination, or following burns, the recommended dose is 500 IU.
Tetanus vaccine and immunoglobulin must be given by separate syringes
into separate sites.
   Metronidazole is the drug of choice for treatment of tetanus.
18



     18    Chapter      Trauma


          Definitive diagnosis
          Full assessment of the maxillofacial region requires careful examination of
          the soft and hard tissues.
          Inspection: facial
          Soft tissue
          Facial soft tissue injuries should be carefully recorded.
            A laceration is caused by blunt trauma—​an incised wound caused by a
          sharp object.
            The use of clinical photography is to be commended especially for com-
          plex lacerations. Such photographs are helpful for medicolegal purposes
          and are always a useful adjunct to planning revision surgery. Each laceration
          should have the following recorded:
          • Contamination: the greatest influence on management is the presence
            or absence of wound contamination. Heavily contaminated wounds,
            regardless of size and depth, need debridement, which often needs to
            be completed under GA.
          • Condition of wound margins:
            • sharp clean cut edge—​this results from sharp injury such as injury on
               a metal edge. These lacerations are simple to repair after appropriate
               debridement;
            • serrated edge—​this can implicate glass fractured in the aetiology
               of the wound. Under these circumstance there are usually glass
               fragments in the wound and they will need careful removal;
            • rounded edge—​if the edge of wound is rounded then it is likely that
               the wound has arisen as a result of friction over a bony protuberance.
               This is the case for the common paediatric injuries, such as cuts on
               the forehead, eyebrows, and chin;
            • necrotic edge—​higher energy transfer to the wound causes
               irreversible damage to the soft tissue edge, such that it is dusky or
               black. Judicious trimming of wound edges needs to be considered in
               such cases.
          • Size: measure length of the laceration with a ruler.
          • Depth:
            • up to dermal depth—​abrasion;
            • up to fat depth—​laceration likely to require suture;
            • Muscle involvement—​consider the possibility of facial nerve or
               parotid involvement in mid-​facial lacerations (the surface anatomy of
               the parotid duct is middle third of line drawn from the tragus to the
               corner of the mouth). The buccal branch of facial nerve is closely
               associated with the parotid duct;
            • bony involvement.
          • Orientation to relaxed skin tension lines: lacerations that are
            orientated in the direction of relaxed skin tension lines are likely to heal
            better than lacerations orientated away from relaxed skin tension lines.
                                                   Definitive diagnosis           19


The following signs of bruising raise suspicion of an underlying fracture:
• Bruising over the skin of the mastoid bone: ‘Battle’s sign’ (can indicate a
  base of skull fracture).
• Bilateral periorbital bruising: ‘raccoon eyes’ (can indicate a fracture of
  the base of the skull, nasoethmoid region, frontal sinus, or Le Fort II/​III
  fracture).
• Bilateral inner canthus bruising: can indicate a nasal bone fracture.
• Bruising overlying the lower border of the mandible: can indicate a
  mandibular fracture.
The presence of facial swelling should be noted, although it correlates
poorly with the severity of the underlying bony injury. Swelling often masks
underlying bony deformity described in the following section.
Bony/​cartilaginous deformity
• Evidence of deformity in the frontal and nasoethmoid area:
  • frontal bone deformity—​this is most commonly seen in patients with
     fractures of the anterior wall of the frontal sinus. The appearance
     is of a midline depression in the area immediately above the
     supraorbital ridge;
  • nasoethmoidal deformity—​this is often associated with frontal
     deformity. The classic appearance includes telecanthus, depression of
     nasal bridge, and elevation of the nasal tip.
• Nasal bone deformity: the nose is frequently disrupted in facial injuries.
  Anatomically, only the upper third of nose is bony. Nasal fractures often
  present with deviation of the nose.
• Evidence of malar flattening: the zygomatic bone forms most of the
  lateral and inferior orbital rim. Inferolateral to this is the prominence of
  the zygoma. Displaced fractures of the zygoma produce flattening of this
  area that it is easy to underestimate in the acute setting as facial swelling
  obscures the appearance.
• Evidence of zygomatic arch deformity:
  • in-​fracture of the arch of the zygoma—​may be an isolated fracture of
     the arch or may be associated with an externally rotated zygomatic
     fracture;
  • out-​fracture of the arch of the zygoma—​seen as bowing of the
     zygomatic arch. Often associated with posterior displacement and
     an internally rotated zygomatic fracture. This is an important clinical
     sign as bowing of the zygomatic arch is hard to correct surgically
     and, if left untreated, leads to persistent bony swelling overlying the
     zygomatic arch.
20



     20    Chapter       Trauma

          Inspection: oral
          Examination of the mouth is mandatory since clinical signs indicating frac-
          tures of the maxilla and mandible are often reflected in intraoral changes
          that are not obscured by general facial swelling.
          • Bruising: sublingual haematoma is highly suggestive of a mandibular
            fracture.
          • Gingival lacerations: laceration of the gingivae in the lower jaw is
            suggestive of a mandibular fracture, and in the upper jaw is suggestive of
            a segmental maxillary fracture.
          • Palatal bruising: indicates either a split palate or Le Fort fracture.
          • Gross deformity of mandible.
          • Disorders of occlusion (Fig. .5):
            • anterior open bite—​either bilateral mandibular condylar fracture or a
               posteriorly displaced Le Fort fracture;
            • lateral open bite—​the patient’s teeth meet normally on one side, but
               on the opposite side there is no contact. The most common cause for
               this is a mandibular condylar fracture on the contralateral side to the
               open bite.




          Fig. .5 Step in occlusion with mandibular fracture.


          Inspection: orbital
          Swelling may obscure a full view of the patient’s eye. If this is the case, it is
          still important to obtain a basic assessment of visual function (see % Initial
          management of ocular injuries, p. 14). Systematic examination of the orbit
          is as follows:
          • Pupillary level: is the pupil at the same level as the opposite eye? If
             one eye is lower, then a hypoglobus exists that may be the result of a
             zygomatic or orbital floor fractures.
          • Anteroposterior eye position: are the eyes in the same position?
             Enophthalmos can be associated with internal orbital wall injury.
             Exophthalmos is one sign of retrobulbar haemorrhage (see % Initial
             management of ocular injuries, p. 14).
                                                  Definitive diagnosis           21


• Intercanthal distance (normally same width as palpebral fissure): an
  increase in the intercanthal width (normal range in Caucasians 28–​
  35mm) results from lateral displacement of the medial canthal tendon.
  The result is telecanthus. The usual cause is a nasoethmoidal fracture.
Inspection: nasal
The nose should be examined externally and internally. Internal examin-
ation of the nose is facilitated by the use of a Thuddicum’s speculum.
• External nasal examination: look for deviation of the nose and
   asymmetry of nasal bones.
• Internal nasal examination:
   • septal haematoma—​this is seen as a bulge on one or both sides of
      the nasal septum that often totally obscures the nasal airway. It is a
      surgical emergency and requires immediate drainage to prevent long-​
      term damage to the septal cartilage.
   • septal deviation/​dislocation—​this is common and should be elicited
      during the initial examination. Acute management may be required.
• CSF rhinorrhoea: this is seen as clear fluid leaking from the nose
   (detected by beta-​2 transferrin assay). It occurs in high-​level mid-​face
   injuries, as well as nasoethmoidal and frontal bone injury. The fluid is
   often seen tram lining—​blood leaking from the nose forms clotted
   streaks of blood down the face with CSF washing away the central
   portion of clotted blood.
Inspection: ear
Inspect the pinna for signs of laceration and haematoma.
• Haematoma of the pinna can compromise the blood supply to the
   underlying cartilage producing a ‘cauliflower’ ear. These haematomas
   need drainage.
• CSF otorrhoea.
• Bleeding from the external auditory meatus (EAM)—​this can result
   from a number of injuries:
  • base of skull fracture (Battle’s sign usually coexists);
  • laceration of the cartilaginous auditory meatus—​can be a sign of
      mandibular condylar injury;
  • bleeding from tympanic membrane—​usually associated with rupture
      of the tympanic membrane.
Active range of movement
Mandibular
Normal mandibular opening is around 35–​45mm. Reduced mandibular
opening is not a reliable indicator of mandibular fracture, since it can be
secondary to soft tissue injuries and effusions of the temporomandibular
joint (TMJ).
2



    22    Chapter      Trauma

         Ocular
         Examine the eyes in primary gaze (looking straight ahead), as well as the
         other eight positions of gaze (left and right central; left, central, and right
         upward gaze; left, central, and right downward gaze). Patients may report
         double vision.
         • Monocular: lens dislocation or retinal detachment.
         • Binocular:
           • entrapment of extraocular muscles and orbital contents;
           • haematoma;
           • dysfunction of extraocular muscles;
           • periglobular oedema;
           • neuropathy of cranial nerves supplying extraocular muscles (III, IV,
              and VI).
         Diplopia on upward gaze is a clinical sign of orbital floor entrapment with
         the false imaging originating in the injured eye. Diplopia in downward gaze
         can be associated with dysfunction of the inferior rectus usually due to
         muscle bruising. All patients with reduced acuity, diplopia, and/​or ocular
         motility abnormalities should be referred for ophthalmology and orthoptic
         assessments.
         Sensory changes and facial fractures
         Assessment should be made of the three divisions of the trigeminal nerve:
         • Supraorbital/​supratrochlear nerves: rarely injured. If sensory
           abnormality exists, it is either a localized injury to the nerve itself (i.e.
           neuropraxia) without an underlying fracture or secondary to a superior
           orbital rim fracture.
         • Infraorbital nerve: commonly injured in orbital floor and zygomatic
           fractures.
         • Mental nerve/​inferior dental (ID) nerve: commonly injured in fractures
           of the mandible. Usually indicates an angle, body, or parasymphyseal
           fracture.
         Specific signs of abnormal mobility
         These signs should be elicited carefully in a conscious patient, since they
         can be painful.
         Maxillary
         Hold the maxilla in a gloved hand and attempt to move it, while restraining
         the forehead. See if movement can be elicited at:
         • Nasal bones and lateral orbital rims—​Le Fort III level fracture.
         • Nasal bones and infraorbital rims—​Le Fort II fracture.
         Mandible
         Inspect the occlusal plane for obvious steps, ask the patient to open their
         mouth and look for displacement/​gaps evident between teeth on jaw
         movement, not present at rest. Press bilaterally at both mandibular angles
         to see if movement in the region anterior to the angles can be elicited. If no
         movement can be appreciated and the patient can protrude their mandible
         normally, a fracture is less likely. The test should not be pursued in the pres-
         ence of an obvious fracture as it will elicit pain.
Definitive diagnosis   23
24



     24    Chapter      Trauma


          Investigations
          Radiography
          Plain film radiographs are sometimes undertaken as a screening tool. In
          simple fractures they are often the only necessary investigation, e.g. frac-
          tures of the tooth-​bearing portion of the mandible or single-​piece fractures
          of the zygoma.
          Occipitomental views
          Otherwise known as ‘Water’s view’, the OM view is taken with the film at
          the chin and the radiographic source at the occiput. High-​quality films need
          the patient to extend their neck, which is not always possible in the acute
          setting. The angulation of the OM view is recorded in degrees and refers to
          the extension of the neck that is present when the film is taken—​a 30° OM
          is commonly ordered (film taken with a 30° neck extension). OM views are
          indicated if a fracture of the zygoma or zygomatic arch is suspected.
          Orthopantomogram
          This is a tomogram of the mandible and is effectively two lateral views of
          the mandible joined together. A second view of the mandible (usually PA)
          is required.
          Posteroanterior mandible
          This is a PA view of the mandible with the film placed at the patient’s chin.
          Computed tomography
          CT has been available since 972. The use of cross-​sectional imaging has
          revolutionized the diagnosis of complex facial trauma. Modifications such
          as helical and multislice scanning mean that CT can be acquired quickly.
          There is also no need for the patient to stand to gain adequate CT images.
          CT images can be reformatted in any plane and three-​dimensional (3D)
          reconstructions can be derived from the original scan data. The other main
          advantage of CT scanning is that good-​quality images can be gained from
          patients in cervical spine immobilization who are supine.
            Indications for CT scanning for facial trauma include:
          • Any unconscious patient who has an associated facial injury.
          • Injuries of the frontal sinus and nasoethmoidal area.
          • Injuries of the middle third of the face.
          • Imaging of orbital floor and orbital wall injuries.
          • Bilateral injuries of the mandibular condylar region.
          • High-​energy transfer injuries to facial region, e.g. gun shots.
          • Pan-​facial fractures.
          Cone beam computed tomography scanning
          The main disadvantage of CT scanning is the radiation dose involved. Since
          CT scanning for facial injuries is finer cut than brain CT, there is a higher
          radiation dose per patient volume (risk of iatrogenic cataracts), hence the
          development of low-​dose cone beam computed tomography (CBCT)
          scanning. The reduction in radiation dose results in a loss of the number
          of Hounsfield units that the scanner can detect. Soft tissue definition of the
          images are therefore inferior to conventional CT scanning. However, for
          diagnostic and reconstructive use in hard tissue facial trauma, CBCT scan-
          ning is adequate for mandibular and basic orbital imaging.
                                                         Investigations          25


Magnetic resonance imaging
MRI may be of use in orbital trauma and can help with detection of site of
CSF leaks well.
Ultrasound scanning
USS is of limited value in diagnosing fractures of the facial skeleton. There
are some proponents of its use in hard and soft tissue orbital trauma.
Imaging of specific areas
Upper third
• Plain films: of limited value.
• CT: standard imaging for assessment.
• MRI: CSF leaks.
Middle third
• Plain films: simple fractures (OMs, submentovertex (SMV)).
• CT: orbits, consider stereolithography/​navigation.
• MRI: orbits.
Lower third
• Plain films: usually sufficient.
• CT: condylar fractures and polytrauma.
Soft tissue
• Plain films: foreign bodies.
• CT: metallic foreign bodies.
• MRI: non-​metallic foreign bodies.
• Sialography: parotid duct injuries.
• Dacryocystography: nasolacrimal injuries.
• Angiography: penetrating neck trauma (see % ‘How to do’ emergency
  procedures, p. 6).
Orthoptic assessment
Orthoptic examination is the specialized assessment of eye movement. This
examination requires individual items of equipment and the patient has to
able to open both eyes. As a result, this form of assessment is only practical
when any facial swelling has resolved. An orthoptic assessment includes a
Hess chart and documentation of fields of binocular single vision.
26



     26    Chapter       Trauma


          Definitive surgery
          Soft tissue management
          The facial soft tissues should be repaired as soon as possible after the injury.
          Contaminated wounds need debridement within 24h of injury. Consider
          use of Steri-​Strips™ or glue.
          Choice of anaesthetic
          Many clean small lacerations can be treated under LA. Indications for GA
          include:
          •	Lacerations in some children.
          •	Large or multiple lacerations.
          •	Lacerations that require exploration of deeper structures.
          • Contaminated wounds that need significant debridement.
          Primary treatment
          All contamination of the wound must be addressed before the wound is
          closed. Facial injuries resulting from direct abrasions on road surfaces im-
          pregnate debris deep into the dermis. The tattooing effect that results from
          inadequate primary debridement of such wounds is virtually impossible to
          correct with scar revision.
          Choice of suture material and technique
          • Close wounds in layers using resorbable sutures in the deeper layers.
          • Shelving wounds need differential suturing (larger bite on thicker
            wounds edge).
          • Use non-​resorbable sutures (5/​0 to 6/​0) unless it is impractical to
            remove sutures, in which case 6/​0 to 7/​0 resorbable sutures should be
            employed.
          Specialized sites
          Lips
          •	Lips need careful repair, paying particular attention to realignment of the
             muscle layer andvermillion border (Fig. .6).
          • Full-​thickness lip lacerations demand three-​layer closure and antibiotic
             prophylaxis considered.




          Fig. .6 Careful approximation of vermillion border in lip laceration.
                                                      Definitive surgery          27


Parotid duct
The surface marking of the parotid duct is the middle third of a line drawn
between the tragus of the ear and the corner of the mouth. It is always
closely associated with the buccal branch of the facial nerve that is often
injured along with injuries of the parotid duct.
• Any deep facial wound crossing this area should be explored under GA
   and examined under magnification.
• Parotid duct injuries can sometimes be diagnosed preoperatively by
   inspecting the wound for a salivary leak. Alternatively, retrograde
   injection of methylene blue into the parotid duct can be employed.
•	The distal cut end of the parotid duct can be identified by cannulating
   the duct from the mouth.
•	The proximal end is more difficult to identify—​milk the gland and watch
   its cut surface under magnification for saliva pooling.
•	The duct is repaired by loosely tacking the ends around a stent passed
   via the mouth through the distal and proximal ends of the duct.
•	The stent, e.g. plastic outer sheath of spinal needle, is left in situ for
   7–​4 days.
Facial nerve
The facial nerve exits the stylomastoid foramen at the base of the skull and
enters the parotid gland. After a short distance it divides into an upper and
lower division that then further divides into five main branches (temporal,
zygomatic, buccal, marginal mandibular, and cervical). The facial nerve is af-
forded a degree of protection in blunt facial trauma since it lies embedded
within the parotid gland.
   Anatomical notes relevant to injury:
•	The facial nerve has an intratemporal course, as well as an
   extratemporal course. Intra-​bony injuries of the facial nerve can occur
   in skull base fracture, extratemporal lesions tend to occur in penetrating
   neck and facial injuries.
•	The facial nerve has rich cross-​innervation between the zygomatic and
   buccal branches that mediates the effects of injury to these branches.
•	The temporal and marginal mandibular branches have less cross-​
   innervation and if injured will frequently require repair.
•	The temporal branch crosses the zygomatic arch at least cm in front of
   the root of the arch.
•	The buccal branch is closely associated with the parotid duct.
•	The marginal mandibular branch crosses into the neck and lies up to
   .5cm below the lower border of the mandible. Its lowest point is
   posterior to the facial artery.
Primary nerve repair should be undertaken if there is obvious muscle weak-
ness and there is a nerve injury proximal to a line drawn vertically from the
lateral canthus of the eye (Fig. .7).
   Primary nerve repair should be undertaken at the time of closure of the
laceration even if this is for some reason delayed. Delayed nerve repair is
still worth attempting, since it can take several months after the original in-
jury for the motor end plates to atrophy.
28



     28    Chapter       Trauma




          Fig. .7 Facial incised wound caused by a knife.

            Nerve repair should be performed under magnification using a micro-
          scope and 8/​0–​0/​0 sutures. Both epineural and perineural repair can yield
          good results if the nerve is correctly opposed. If there is a segment of
          nerve missing, it is advisable to include a nerve graft in the repair to prevent
          over-​stretching.
          Eyelids
          Eyelid lacerations can be a marker for the presence of underlying injuries to
          the globe, orbit, and brain. Beware of the possibility of an already ruptured
          globe. Eyelid lacerations can also herald the presence of a foreign body.
          Local structures that may be injured include:
          •	Lacrimal apparatus (laceration in the medial canthal area).
          •	Levator apparatus (within the upper eyelid)—​check for ptosis of the
             upper eyelid.
          • Corneal injury (frequently found in association with lid lacerations
             crossing the free margin of the lower eyelid).
          Injuries to these three areas should be managed in conjunction with an oph-
          thalmic surgeon. Small lacerations of the eyelid skin not associated with
          globe injury and not involving these three areas can often be managed con-
          servatively with debridement alone or, if large, addressed with 6/​0 suture
          material.
                                                      Definitive surgery          29


Management of tissue loss
Wounds should be carefully assessed for tissue loss at the time of debride-
ment. Options for management of tissue loss will depend upon:
• Quantity of tissue loss.
• Degree of contamination.
• Site of tissue loss.
• Damage to/​loss of deep structures—​bone/​cartilage.
The options for management of tissue loss broadly follow the recon-
structive ladder:
• Used in primary injury:
   • primary closure;
   • delayed closure;
   • dressings/​healing by secondary intention;
   • split-​thickness graft;
   • full-​thickness graft.
• Used in secondary reconstruction:
   • tissue expansion;
   • local flap (random pattern/​axial, pedicled);
   • distant flap (random pattern/​axial, pedicled);
   • free flap.

For most acute injuries it is better to use as simple a method of reconstruc-
tion possible for treatment.
Primary/​delayed closure
Facial skin is elastic and can be used to advance over areas of tissue loss.
The best example of this is the heavily contaminated wound with nec-
rotic edges. The wound is debrided, necrotic edges excised, the wound
advanced, and then closed primarily. Delayed primary closure is rarely re-
quired in the face.
Dressings/​healing by secondary intention
Small areas of tissue loss at sites where there is no underlying exposed bone
or cartilage can be allowed to granulate. The process of wound healing
occurs in three stages—​inflammatory, fibroplasia, and remodelling. The re-
modelling phase commences at around 3 weeks and involves maturation of
myofibroblasts with contraction of the wound.
Split-​thickness graft/​full-​thickness graft
Skin grafts are useful in the management of tissue loss as they can provide
cover for large exposed areas of muscle, perichondrium, and pericranium.
Skin grafts are particularly useful in areas where there is little tissue move-
ment that would otherwise influence graft take. Skin grafts are therefore
appropriate in areas such as the nose and scalp as opposed to the mobile
lips. Skin grafting has the added advantage of wound contracture that re-
duces the size of the graft area in cases subsequently requiring secondary
reconstruction.
30



     30    Chapter      Trauma

          Flaps
          Flap surgery is frequently avoided in the acute setting. However, certain
          circumstances necessitate the use of flaps:
          • Areas of exposed bone or cartilage that cannot be closed primarily.
          • Gross incompetence of the lips as a result of tissue loss (as a delayed
             primary procedure following initial debridement).
          • Composite tissue loss in gunshot injury (as a delayed primary procedure
             following initial debridement).
          Aftercare
          Patients require wound care following soft tissue injury. Facial lacerations
          should have all non-​resorbable sutures removed at 5 days. Wounds that
          have been left to granulate should ideally be dressed with a non-​adherent,
          absorbent dressing. This is not possible with tissue loss on the lips, to which
          simple petroleum jelly can be applied. Dressings over skin grafts should ini-
          tially be removed at 5 days to inspect the take of the graft.
          Secondary procedures
          Since maturation of skin scars can take up to 2 years, it is usually inadvisable
          to consider early secondary revision. The exception to this is the early exci-
          sion of a skin graft or area left to heal by secondary intention.
          Hypertrophic scars
          These are usually apparent within 2 months of a primary procedure. Since
          pressure accelerates maturation of the scar, pressure garments or mas-
          sage might reduce their occurrence. Hypertrophic scars are more likely to
          occur in deeper wounds, contaminated wounds, and those allowed to heal
          by secondary intention. Silicone sheets or gels can minimize the impact of
          such scars.
Definitive surgery   31
32



     32    Chapter      Trauma


          Principles of hard tissue management
          Fractures
          Types
          • Simple: single fracture.
          • Compound: communicates with body surface.
          • Comminuted: several pieces.
          • Complicated: involving vascular or neurological structure.
          • Greenstick: involves only one cortex.
          • Pathological.
          Phases of bone healing
          • Haematoma and acute inflammation.
          • Osteolytic phase: eburnation of bone ends and formation of
            granulation tissue.
          • Osteogenic phase: early callus formation and lamellar bone production.
          •	Remodelling.
          Problems with bone healing
          • General, e.g. diabetes, scurvy, immunocompromise, smoking.
          •	Local, e.g. infection, soft tissue interposition.
          • Delayed union.
          • Malunion—​fracture healing with misalignment.
          • Non-​union—​failure to heal.
          Principles of management
          •	Reduction.
          • Fixation.
          • Immobilization.
          •	Rehabilitation.
          Osteosynthesis principles
          Fracture healing in facial bones is rapid and reliable. Non-​union is unusual,
          but malunion is a frequent result of inadequate primary treatment. Unlike
          long bones, fracture healing does not require absolute rigid immobilization.
          A limited amount of micromovement in a clean uninfected fracture with
          healthy periosteum does not impede healing.
            Osteosynthesis was revolutionized with the introduction of titanium
          miniplates that can be used to fix almost all fractures in the facial skeleton.
          The advantages of miniplates include:
          • Variety of small sizes available with both monocortical and bicortical
            fixation.
          •	Titanium is extremely well biotolerated and rarely requires a secondary
            removal procedure.
          •	Titanium is malleable to ensure passive fit of plates at the fracture site.
          Choice of anaesthesia
          The majority of facial fractures will require treatment under GA. The occa-
          sional exception to this rule is the mandible and dentoalveolar process of
          the maxilla and mandible. The latter tooth-​bearing region is easily anaesthe-
          tized with regional nerve blocks and can be repaired under LA as long as
          there are no other associated injuries.
                          Principles of hard tissue management                  33


Mandibular fractures
The mandible is the densest bone in the human body. It is ‘U’-​shaped with
a TMJ at either end. Mandibular fractures can be anatomically divided into
regions:
• Symphysis: the midline of the mandible.
• Parasymphysis: either side of the midline proximal to the mental
  foramen.
• Body: area anterior to the mandibular angle and posterior to the mental
  foramen.
• Angle: junction of body and ramus.
• Ramus: below sigmoid notch and above the angle.
• Coronoid process: a fracture above the base of the sigmoid notch
  affecting the coronoid process.
• Condylar area:
  • condylar base—​runs from the posterior border of the mandible into
     the sigmoid notch;
  • condylar neck—​superior to condylar base;
  • intracapsular—​within the joint capsule.

Mandibular fractures are often multiple. The commonest fracture patterns
are the parasymphysis and angle fracture, or the parasymphysis and con-
dylar fracture.
  Mandibular fractures should be assessed for:
• Inferior alveolar nerve injury: must be documented before fracture
  treatment.
• Presence of decayed or fractured teeth: teeth that cannot be restored,
  either as a result of the injury or pre-​existing dental disease, should be
  extracted at the time of surgery.
• Displacement: undisplaced fractures should be considered for
  conservative management.
• Stability.
• Displacement of the fracture is the key indicator of fracture stability: a
  grossly displaced fracture tears the periosteum that otherwise adds
  stability to the fracture.
• Dental occlusion: a normal dentition with a potentially normal occlusion
  will add to stability of the fracture reduction.
• Height of alveolar bone: the greater the effective height of the
  mandible, the greater the potential stability of the fracture.
• Comminution: this suggests a high-​energy injury that is difficult to treat
  and prone to infection and non-​union.
Tooth-​bearing regions: symphysis, parasymphysis, body,
and angle
Indications for treatment
• Displaced fracture with abnormal occlusion.
• Unresolving pain from undisplaced fracture.
Mandibular fractures can be treated conservatively if they are undisplaced.
Patients have to be compliant and able to tolerate a strict liquid/​soft diet
for 4 weeks. They need careful monitoring to check for failure of treatment
that is usually heralded by a change in occlusion or increasing pain.
34



     34    Chapter      Trauma

             Historically, many patients with mandibular fractures were treated with
          rigid intermaxillary fixation. This is now rarely carried out except in in-
          stances of exceptionally complex fractures when the full remit of recon-
          structive techniques are not available.
          Surgical access
          These fractures can be accessed via transmucosal incisions made in the
          buccal sulcus or around the gingival margins. A mucoperiosteal flap is raised
          taking care to protect the mental nerve at the junction of the parasymphysis
          and body of the mandible. Incisions need to be designed avoiding a suture
          line directly over osteosynthetic material. Material should ideally be covered
          by muscle, such as the buccinator or mentalis muscle.
             It is advisable to expose all the potential fractures of the mandible before
          reduction and fixation. Incorrect fixation of one fracture site will make it
          impossible to reduce the fracture at other sites.
          Reduction
          It is essential that there is adequate reduction of the bony fragments, par-
          ticularly at the level of the teeth, so that a normal occlusion is returned.
          Small discrepancies in bony reduction can be tolerated, but even small dis-
          crepancies in the dental occlusion ideally should not be accepted.
             Reduction of the fracture can be achieved by:
          • Hand-​held reduction.
          •	Temporary intermaxillary fixation:
             • eyelet wire;
             •	Leonard buttons and wires;
             • intermaxillary fixation (IMF) screws;
             • arch bars.
          • Direct bony reduction: this can sometimes be obtained in the anterior
             mandible by applying a temporary wire between two monocortical
             screws. There is a tendency to close the fracture on the buccal aspect
             of the mandible and, consequently, to open it on its lingual aspect.
          Fixation
          The bony ends are fixed according to the principles set out by Michelet and
          Champy:
          • Monocortical fixation with 2.0 diameter screws through the outer
             cortex only, to avoid damage to the roots of the teeth. A minimum of
             two screws either side of the fracture line should be placed per plate.
          • All plates to be pre-​bent so that they fit passively on to the surface of
             the mandible.
          •	Two plates used anterior to the mental foramen to resist the torsional
             effects of the anterior mandibular musculature. Plates to be placed at
             least 5mm apart.
          • One plate along the line of maximal tension in the body and angle. This
             line approximates to the external oblique ridge of the mandible.
          • Osteosynthesis at the mandibular angle can be placed on the lateral
             aspect of the external oblique ridge, utilizing a transbuccal trochar
             to maintain the screw direction perpendicular to the plate and the
             underlying bone (Fig. .8 and Fig. .9).
                            Principles of hard tissue management   35




Fig. .8 PA view of treated fractured mandible.




Fig. .9 OPG view of treated fractured mandible.
36



     36    Chapter      Trauma

          When Michelet–​Champy principles do not apply
          Michelet and Champy originally published their articles on miniplate fixation
          recommending that patients be placed in IMF postoperatively for 6 weeks
          for additional stability. Current trauma management focuses on early return
          to function so patients are not placed in IMF postoperatively.
             Michelet–​Champy is essentially a ‘load-​sharing’ osteosynthesis, relying
          on optimal fracture healing conditions and good bony contact. This can be
          lacking under the following circumstances:
          • Comminution.
          • Body fractures.
          • Multiple edentulous segments.
          • Irradiation, bisphosphonate therapy, or other cause of pathological
             fracture.
          • Infected fracture.
          • Poor patient compliance.
          • Diabetes, alcoholism, smoking, or immunosuppression.
          These factors tend to occur in combination. If they are present then con-
          sideration should be given to ‘load-​bearing’ osteosynthesis. This is funda-
          mentally different to ‘load-​sharing osteosynthesis’ in the following respects:
          •	Rigid fixation with thick profile plate capable of taking most of the
             muscular load of the mandible. This is placed along the lower border of
             the mandible to give maximal mucosal coverage, and minimize the risk
             to the ID nerve and teeth roots.
          • Bicortical fixation usually >2.0mm screws, at least three screws either
             side of the fracture line, with all screws perpendicular to bone surface.
             Modern designs of plates utilize locking screws that lock into the plate
             eliminating any micromovement between the plate and screw, which
             is otherwise a cause of metalwork loosening and subsequent failure of
             fixation.
          • Greater access to mandible usually required. This usually means a
             transcutaneous approach through an extended submandibular incision.
          Postoperative care
          Postoperatively, patients need to be advised about care of their fracture:
          • Soft diet: irrespective of the type of fixation, patients need to avoid full
            masticatory force for between 4 and 6 weeks after fixation.
          • Oral hygiene: patients need to be diligent.
          Complications
          • Iatrogenic inferior alveolar nerve injury.
          • Infection.
          •	Late metalwork loosening leading to late infection.
          • Occlusal changes (inadequate reduction).
          • Non-​union.
          Edentulous mandible
          The fractured edentulous mandible is challenging to treat for a variety of
          reasons:
          •	Reduced mandibular height as a result of loss of alveolar bone—​
            particularly a problem with <0mm of mandibular height.
          • Fractures often tend to occur in the mandibular body where muscle pull
            displacing the fracture is at its greatest.
                            Principles of hard tissue management          37


• Potential vascular compromise with significant periosteal stripping—​
  theory of reduced ID artery contribution.
• Old age and other patient co-​morbidity reduces capacity for fracture
  healing.
Treatment options
• Undisplaced fractures: treat conservatively.
• Displaced fractures:
  • conservative if significant co-​morbidity (use dentures, Gunning
     splints);
  • open reduction internal fixation (ORIF) with mucosal flap;
  • closed reduction and transmucosal screws and supramucosal
     locking plate;
  • ORIF with extraoral approach (bicortical reconstruction plate or
     sandwich technique with split rib) (Fig. .0 and Fig. .);
  • extraoral pin fixation.




Fig. .0 Transmucosal plate.




Fig. . Postoperative image of transmucosal plate.
38



     38    Chapter     Trauma

          Mandibular condyle
          In addition to the anatomical area of the condyle, affected fractures can be
          further described in terms of:
          • Displacement: overlap of proximal and distal fragment.
          • Angulation: anteroposteriorly.
          • Angulation: mediolaterally.
          • Dislocation (of condylar head).
          • Comminution.
          Displaced unilateral fractures of the mandibular condyle region that cause
          an abnormality of occlusion usually demand treatment. The options are:
          • Conservative.
          • Closed reduction.
          • Open reduction.
          Conservative
          • Appropriate for:
            • intracapsular fractures with mandibular height maintained (particularly
              need early mobilization to prevent ankylosis);
            • most fractures in children (often intracapsular);
            • undisplaced fractures;
            • minimally displaced fractures with no malocclusion;
            • edentulous patients;
            • patients with significant co-​morbidity where risks of GA outweigh
              benefits of intervention.
          • Achieved by:
            • soft diet;
            • close follow-​up.

          Closed reduction
          • Appropriate for:
            • displaced fractures in children;
            • cases with malocclusion where ORIF contraindicated.
          • Achieved by:
            • arch bars and elastic traction or wire fixation;
            • suspension wires + IMF in mixed dentition.
          • Advantages:
            • no surgical scar or nerve complications;
            • simple technique.
          • Disadvantages:
            • reliant on good patient compliance;
            • arch bars and associated wiring may cause periodontal damage
               to teeth;
            • limitation of mouth opening leads to long-​term reduction in
               mandibular movement (can take months to recover);
            • requires a second procedure to remove the arch bars.
          • Complications:
            • occlusal abnormality;
            • d range of mandibular movement;
            • damage to teeth, caries, periodontal disease.
                          Principles of hard tissue management                39


Open reduction
• Indications:
  • lateral extracapsular displacement;
  • bony overlap of >5mm—​ramus shortening;
  • open joint wound with foreign body or gross contamination;
  • dislocation of condylar head into middle cranial fossa or EAM.
  • associated maxillary fracture so that closed reduction with
    intermaxillary traction is not possible;
  • patient preference/​poor patient compliance (many patients are
    unwilling to undergo elastic traction).
Surgical access
•	Retromandibular with transparotid approach (most frequently used
  approach).
• Submandibular.
• Preauricular with temporal extension.
•	Transmeatal through EAM (popular in Europe).
• Intraoral.
• Intra-​/​extraoral approach with endoscopic visualization.
Transparotid approach
• Cutaneous incision 2–​3cm long just below the ear lobule in a skin crease
  directly overlying the posterior border of the mandible.
• Sharp dissection through the parotid capsule.
• Blunt dissection through the parotid gland between branches of the
  facial nerve until mandible is visible.
• Periosteum of mandible incised and widely stripped to give access to the
  condylar base and condylar neck region.
• Fixation using:
  • 2mm miniplates (usually two, not parallel to one another) or
     lambda-​shaped plate;
  • specially designed condylar plates.

Complications
• Facial nerve injury: most studies reveal a low rate of temporary injury
  with permanent injury being rare.
• Salivary fistula.
• Facial scar.
• Frey’s syndrome.
• Malunion (inadequate reduction).
• Fixation failure (inadequate fixation).
• Widening of the mandibular width at the angles when fixing the
  symphysis in a ‘guardsman’s fracture’ caused by direct impact to the chin
  producing bilateral condylar and symphyseal fractures.
40



     40    Chapter        Trauma


          Mid-​face fractures
          Le Fort fracture levels
          There are three levels of maxillary fracture classically described as Le Fort
          fracture levels. Fractures at these levels rarely occur in isolation. They may
          also occur at different levels on both sides. Comminuted fractures are com-
          monplace due to the thin nature of the maxillary bone. Le Fort classification
          is used to describe the highest level of the fracture.
          Le Fort I
          This fracture runs from the pterygoid plates anteriorly through the lateral
          wall of the maxillary antrum to the piriform aperture of the nose (Fig. .2).
          Le Fort II
          This fracture runs from the pterygoid plates anteriorly and superiorly,
          through the inferior orbital rim, and into the inferomedial orbital floor. The
          fracture then runs across the bridge of the nose. As a result, the whole of
          the tooth-​bearing portion of the maxilla and the nose is involved (Fig. .3).
          Le Fort III
          This is craniofacial dysjunction with the whole of the mid-​face separated
          from the skull base. The fracture lines run from the superior aspect of the
          pterygoid plates, through the lateral wall of the orbit, and out into the
          base of the zygomatic arch and frontozygomatic suture, as well as the nasal
          bridge in the midline (Fig. .4).




          Fig. .2 Le Fort I fracture.
                                  Mid-face fractures   41




Fig. .3 Le Fort II fracture.




Fig. .4 Le Fort III fracture.
42



     42    Chapter      Trauma

          Indications for treatment
          • Occlusal abnormality, e.g. anterior open bite.
          • Mobility of maxilla.
          •	Lack of facial projection and width as a result of zygomatic arch
            deformity in Le Fort III fracture.
          Surgical access
          Dependent on the level of the fracture:
          • Le Fort I: incision in the upper buccal sulcus.
          • Le Fort II: the lower part of a Le Fort II fracture can be accessed via a
            Le Fort I incision, but the infraorbital part aspect of the fracture requires
            transcutaneous/​transconjunctival access.
          • Le Fort III: accessed via multiple cutaneous incisions or from above via
            a coronal approach (% see Zygomatic fractures, p. 44). Full exposure of
            the zygomatic arch is essential in the presence of i facial width and lack
            of facial projection.
          Reduction
          Le Fort fractures are often driven backwards along the skull base in an in-
          ferior and posterior direction, resulting in the classic open bite deformity.
          They often impact in this position and, therefore, initially may require
          disimpaction with Rowe’s forceps. The problem of impaction can be com-
          pounded by the fact that sometimes fractures are incomplete. Under this
          circumstance, fractures should be completed at the Le Fort I fracture level
          to aid reduction of the occlusion.
          Fixation
          Fixation with internal wiring has been superseded with semi-​rigid miniplate
          fixation. In order to restore facial proportions, the fractures are repaired in
          the following sequence:
          • Zygomatic arch reconstruction to restore facial projection and width.
          • Stabilization of the frontozygomatic sutures to restore facial height.
          • Stabilization of the inferior orbital rims.
          •	Restoration of the vertical buttresses of the maxilla:
             • anterior buttress, namely the lateral piriform apertures;
             • middle buttress, namely the zygomatic buttresses.

          Complications
          • ‘Dish face’ deformity (inadequate reduction).
          • Infection.
          • Occlusal changes (inadequate reduction).
Mid-face fractures   43
4



    44    Chapter       Trauma


         Zygomatic fractures
         Zygomatic fractures often occur secondary to blunt trauma to the
         periorbital area (Fig. .5).




         Fig. .5 Fracture sites of zygomatic complex.

         Indications for treatment
         Zygomatic fractures can be undisplaced, in which case they are managed
         conservatively. All displaced fractures need assessment for potential cor-
         rection (Fig. .6 and Fig. .7).
           Indications for correction include:
         • Asymmetry of the malar prominence.
         • Unresolving diplopia.
         • Orbital deformity: can be clinically underestimated in the presence
            of facial swelling. Complex comminuted fractures may require CT
            scanning.
         •	Restricted mouth opening due to impingement on the coronoid
            process.
         •	There is no firm evidence that reduction improves infraorbital nerve
            sensation/​dysaesthesia.
                                                    Zygomatic fractures   45




Fig. .6 Clinical appearance of fractured right zygoma.




Fig. .7 OM view of fractured right zygomatic complex.
46



     46    Chapter       Trauma

          Surgical access
          Closed
          • Gillie’s approach (Fig. .8):
            • temporal cutaneous incision;
            • incision through temporalis fascia allows instrument to be passed
               under zygoma.
          • Intraoral.
          •	Extraoral with Poswillo hook.
          Open
          •	Through pre-​existing laceration.
          • Frontozygomatic suture:
            • upper lateral blepharoplasty;
            • crow’s foot;
            • lateral eyebrow;
            • lower lid transconjunctival with lateral canthotomy.
          • Inferior orbital rim:
            • transcutaneous—​subcilary, blepharoplasty, midtarsal, infraorbital;
            • transconjunctival.
          • Zygomatic buttress: infraorbital buccal sulcus.
          • Zygomatic arch: coronal flap incision or TMJ approach.
          • Lynch incision: access to medial wall of orbit.
          • Coronal: complex/​comminuted fractures.




          Fig. .8 Gillie’s approach to fractured zygoma.
                                                  Zygomatic fractures              47


Points of note regarding open access
• Motor nerve supply of orbicularis oculi muscle in lower lid enters on
  deep surface.
•	Risk of ectropion reduced by stepped approach and low incision.
•	Risk of ectropion highest with subciliary incision.
•	Transconjunctival access can be improved by incorporation of:
  • canthotomy (lateral wall of orbit);
  • transcaruncular approach (medial wall of orbit).
• Coronal incision:
  • provides access to frontal bones, frontal sinuses, orbital rim,
     zygomatic arches, nasoethmoidal complex;
  • consider stealth incision;
  • subgaleal approach initially;
  • frontal branch of facial nerve protected by reflecting superficial layer
     of temporalis fascia;
  • supraorbital bundles may need to be released with osteotomy.

Reduction
The zygoma has an axis of rotation around a line drawn from the
frontozygomatic suture to the zygomatic buttress. Broadly, two types of
deformity occur:
• Rotation around the axis:
   • external rotation results in out-​fracture of the infraorbital rim and in-​
      fracture of the zygomatic arch;
   • internal rotation results in out-​fracture or bowing of the zygomatic
      arch and in-​fracture of the infraorbital rim.
• Shift of the entire axis: cardinal sign of this is displacement at the
   frontozygomatic suture or the maxillary buttress.
Fixation
• None.
• Miniplate fixation at one or more sites.
•	Transnasal K-​wire and antral packing are historically described but no
   longer indicated.
Medial process of maxilla
• Palpable/​radiographically evidence of infraorbital step; can be
  misdiagnosed as zygomatic fracture.
• Can be associated naso-​orbital fracture.
• No clinical or radiographic signs of fracture of the body of the zygoma.
48



     48    Chapter       Trauma


          Orbital fractures
          The orbit consists of an outer and inner frame.
          • Outer frame:
             • inferior—​laterally zygoma, medially maxilla;
             • superior—​frontal bone.
          • Inner frame:
             • floor—​roof of the maxillary sinus and orbital plate of palatine bone;
             • medial wall—​ethmoidal and lacrimal bones anteriorly, lesser wing of
               sphenoid with optic canal posteriorly;
             • lateral wall—​zygoma and greater wing of sphenoid;
             • roof—​frontal bone.

          Any part of the orbit both internal and external can be fractured. The most
          common areas of fracture are the zygoma and the inferomedial orbital wall.
          Isolated internal orbital injuries are termed ‘blow-​out’ or ‘blow-​in’ fractures.
          Indications for treatment
          •	Enophthalmos.
          • Non-​resolving diplopia secondary to entrapment.
          The following clinical guidelines can be applied:
          •	Entrapment more commonly results in diplopia looking upwards
            (Fig. .9).
          • Muscle dysfunction usually results in diplopia looking downwards.
          • Muscle dysfunction tends to improve with time, therefore delayed repair
            of orbital floor injuries is often employed.
          • Orthoptic assessment is very useful in distinguishing muscle dysfunction
            from muscle entrapment.
          Paediatric orbital injuries
          These fractures need treating urgently if there is entrapment present. Often
          a trap door defect occurs, which can result in early necrosis of the trapped
          soft tissue. The classic presentation is the so-​called white eye blow-​out—​a
          combination of an internal orbital fracture with an exaggerated oculocardiac
          reflex so that the child presents with diplopia and hypotension ± vomiting.




          Fig. .9 Restricted upgaze of the right eye.
                                                            Orbital fractures   49


Enophthalmos
•	Results from an increase in orbital volume.
• Normal orbital volume = 30mL, of which the globe occupies 6.5mL.
• Degree of orbital volume change is most marked if the orbit is fractured
  in its inferomedial portion, particularly in the area behind the globe.
  Displaced fractures in this area produce enophthalmos proportionate to
  the increase in volume producing enophthalmos.
•	Enophthalmos may not be clinically apparent immediately following
  injury because of swelling of the orbital contents. The true extent of
  enophthalmos is revealed at around 2–​4 weeks following injury, when
  this swelling has resolved.
•	Enophthalmos is clinically obvious to most patients when it
  exceeds 2mm.
Surgical access
• Orbital floor fractures are accessed via infraorbital incisions (Fig. .20)
  (see % Zygomatic fractures, p. 44).
• Avoid damage to the orbital contents and optic nerve.
• Optic canal sits 40mm posterior to a normally positioned inferior orbital.
•	The orbital plate of the palatine bone is rarely fractured and, therefore,
  solid bone is usually encountered before reaching the optic foramen.
• Access is usually via a transcutaneous or transconjunctival approach
  (see % Zygomatic fractures, p. 44), although endoscopically assisted
  approaches from the nasal cavity and maxillary sinus have been described.
Isolated defect of floor causing entrapment
• May not cause enophthalmos.
•	Ensure thorough dissection at operation with freeing of soft tissue and
  identification of all bony defect edges.
• Check presence of entrapment intraoperatively with a forced duction
  test applied to the inferior rectus muscle.
•	Reconstruct to prevent repeat herniation and entrapment of orbital
  contents.




Fig. .20 CT scan showing a right orbital floor fracture.
50



     50    Chapter       Trauma

          Inferomedial wall defect with enophthalmos
          One-​third of orbital floor fractures have a medial wall component and asso-
          ciated enophthalmos. Additional exposure is sometimes required (Fig. .2)
          (see % Zygomatic fractures, p. 44).
          Reconstructive options for orbital defects
          • Autologous bone:
            • maxillary antrum, outer table of skull or iliac crest;
            • well tolerated;
            • ultimately integrate with the surrounding orbit;
            • prone to resorption;
            • can be difficult to contour in three dimensions.
          • Alloplastic materials:
            • titanium mesh ± polythene covering;
            • well tolerated;
            • rarely require removal.

          Complications
          •	Loss of vision (all orbital surgery including zygoma surgery caries a
            remote risk of visual loss).
          •	Retrobulbar haemorrhage (see % Initial management of ocular injuries,
            p. 14).
          • Flat zygoma (inadequate reduction).
          • Bowed zygomatic arch (usually due to inadequate anterior positioning of
            zygoma, can be due to over-​reduction of the arch).




          Fig. .2 Orbital floor exposure.
                                                      Orbital fractures            51


• Infraorbital anaesthesia.
• Worsening of diplopia due to iatrogenic damage to the extraocular
  muscles.
•	Ectropion from cutaneous lower lid incisions.
Orbital roof
Orbital roof fractures are often associated with other fractures of the
frontal bone ± dural tear and CSF leakage. They tend to be associated with
exophthalmos due to a reduced orbital volume—​this forms the main indi-
cation for treatment. If exophthalmos is present, it may be pulsatile due to
brain vascularity. This sign is most frequently seen in children and is an indi-
cation for repair. In some instances, orbital roof fractures are best repaired
in conjunction with a neurological surgeon, as an intracranial approach may
be required to reduce herniated brain.
Superior orbital fissure syndrome
•	This is due to compression of:
   • abducens VI;
   • oculomotor (superior and inferior divisions) III;
   • trochlear IV;
   • frontal, lacrimal, and nasocilary branches of ophthalmic nerve VI.
•	Results in:
   • exophthalmos;
   • anaesthesia of the frontal branch of the trigeminal nerve;
   • ptosis;
   • ophthalmoplegia.

Superior orbital fissure syndrome can result from blunt facial trauma. It has
a good prognosis if treated conservatively. Most cases make a full recovery
within 3 months.
Orbital apex syndrome
• Superior orbital fissure syndrome associated with visual loss as a result
  of damage to the optic nerve.
• Patients with the superior orbital fissure syndrome or orbital apex
  syndrome should be assessed with CT scanning.
• Optic nerve injuries have a poor prognosis.
•	Role of steroids controversial.
• Patients found to have bony fragments impinging on the optic nerve
  should be considered for surgical exploration.
52



     52    Chapter      Trauma


          Frontal bone fractures
          Injuries to the supraorbital ridge produce fractures of two overlapping types:
          • Frontal sinus.
          • Nasoethmoid.
          Frontal sinus fractures
          The frontal sinus is made up of an anterior wall, which forms part of the
          forehead, a posterior wall that is in contact with the brain, and a floor that
          is continuous with the nasoethmoidal area. Management is dependent on
          the area fractured.
          Classification
          • Anterior wall.
          • Posterior wall.
          • Floor.
          • Combinations.
          Indications for treatment
          • Cosmetic defect.
          • Prevention of sequelae—​meningitis, Potts puffy tumour, mucocoele.
          Anterior wall injuries
          Isolated fractures of the anterior wall are managed depending on the fore-
          head deformity that they produce. Minimally displaced injuries producing no
          forehead deformity do not need treatment. Isolated displaced injuries tend
          to be associated with large frontal sinuses and are treated with:
          • Access: coronal incision.
          • Reduction: fragments are reduced to their anatomical position. This is
             sometimes easier if the fragments are removed, reconstructed and then
             replaced as a free bone graft.
          • Fixation: titanium miniplate <.5mm screw diameter.
          Posterior wall injuries
          Posterior wall injuries can be associated with brain injury and CSF leaks. Left
          untreated, there is a long-​term risk of secondary infective meningitis. All
          posterior wall injuries should be discussed with a neurosurgeon. Treatment
          options:
          • Conservative: if there is no CSF leak and the fracture is minimally
            displaced.
          • Open: comminuted fractures can be treated with cranialization where
            the posterior wall of the sinus is removed and the brain is allowed to
            herniated towards the reconstructed anterior wall. A pericranial flap
            can be interposed between the brain and the cranial vault to add an
            additional layer of protection against subsequent infection.
          Floor injuries
          Injuries of the floor of the frontal sinus are continuous with the
          nasoethmoidal area and involve damage to the frontonasal duct. There is
          abundant literature on frontonasal management in relation to frontal sinus
          fractures.
                                            Frontal bone fractures               53


Nasoethmoidal injury
Continuous with the inferior wall of the frontal sinus is the nasoethmoidal
complex. Injuries to this area result from trauma across the bridge of the
nose. The nasal and ethmoidal bones are delicate, and comminute easily.
The clinical hallmarks of nasoethmoidal injury include:
• Depression of nasal bridge.
• Upturned nasal tip.
•	Telecanthus as a result of lateral displacement of the medial canthal
  ligament. This usually occurs because the bone that is attached to
  the medial canthal ligament is separated from surrounding fragments
  (Fig. .22).




Fig. .22 Nasoethmoidal fractures.

Indications for treatment
Significant nasal deformity or telecanthus should be treated in the primary
setting since secondary correction of facial deformity in this area is notori-
ously difficult (Fig. .23 and Fig. .24).
Surgical access
As a rule, coronal access is required.
Reduction and fixation
Nasal reconstruction is accomplished by reducing the comminuted nasal
fragments and fixing them in position to the frontal bone. Primary bone
grafting is often required in this area. The key to successful treatment of
nasoethmoidal injury is accurate repositioning of the medial canthus. This
54



     54    Chapter       Trauma

          is technically difficult as the bony fragment to which the medial canthus is
          attached is usually small, and has to be reattached posteriorly in order to
          regain normal appearance and lacrimal function.
          Complications
          • Inadequate repositioning of medial canthal ligament.
          •	Residual nasal deformity.
          • Infection.




          Fig. .23 Facial view of nasoethmoidal fracture.




          Fig. .24 Lateral facial view of nasoethmoidal fracture.
Frontal bone fractures   55
56



     56    Chapter      Trauma


          Pan-​facial fractures
          Pan-​facial injuries are a combination of mandibular, maxillary, and orbital
          injuries. CT assessment is mandatory. Timing of treatment is often delayed
          as patients are likely to have other subcapital injuries that demand urgent as-
          sessment and treatment. The techniques for repairing the individual injuries
          are in general the same as those described for an isolated injury, the only
          difference being in the sequencing:
          •	Reconstruction of the zygomatic arches and frontal area to restore
             upper facial width and facial projection.
          •	Reconstruction of the orbits, orbital floors, and nasoethmoidal area.
          • Anatomical reconstruction of mandible, including condylar fractures, to
             restore lower facial width and projection.
          •	Repositioning of the maxilla at the Le Fort I level including
             reconstruction of the anterior and middle buttress of the maxilla
             (piriform aperture and maxillary buttress).
                                           Isolated nasal fractures             57


Isolated nasal fractures
• Isolated fractures of the nose are common.
•	Easy to undertreat at primary surgery, but often require revision
  because of inadequate treatment of the cartilaginous part of the nose.
•	Treatment can be in the acute setting if there is little swelling.
•	Reassess at 0 days if swelling on presentation.
•	Radiology has no role in assessment.
Indications for treatment
• Nasal deviation/​cosmesis.
• Nasal blockage.
Surgical access
These are often treated as closed injuries. Injuries to the nasal septum
should be considered for primary open septoplasty via an intranasal incision.
Reduction
Since nasal bones are often impacted they may require disimpaction prior to
repositioning under LA or GA.
Fixation
Fixation is achieved with a temporary nasal splint.
Complications
Inadequate reduction and therefore secondary rhinoplasty.
58



     58    Chapter      Trauma


          Dental injuries
          Avulsed teeth
          Avulsed primary dentition does not need any specific treatment. Avulsed
          adult teeth are most common in the 6–​      7-​
                                                        year age group and need
          reimplantation. Avulsed teeth are best managed as follows:
          Pre-​hospital care
          • Ideally teeth are reimplanted as soon as possible.
          •	Extra-​alveolar time (EAT) exceeding 5min has a significantly lower long-​
            term success rate.
          • After h most periodontal ligament cells are non-​viable.
          • If it is not possible to reimplant the tooth at the scene of the accident,
            the tooth should be stored in milk (has been shown to preserve
            periodontal ligament cells for up to 3h).
          Hospital care
          • If grossly contaminated, rinse off the root of the tooth.
          •	The tooth should be splinted to the adjacent teeth (wire, composite).
          • Prescribe antibiotics.
          Secondary care
          • Follow-​up with dentist.
          • Splint removal at 0 days.
          • Most avulsed teeth need root canal treatment (exception—​open apex
            incisors with short EAT).
          Complications
          • Pulp necrosis.
          •	External root resorption.
          • Ankylosis.
          Dentoalveolar fractures
          • Distinguish from basal bone fractures.
          •	Reduced (under LA or GA).
          • Fixation with mid-​face low-​profile miniplates or occasionally arch bars to
            correct occlusion.
          • Consider endodontic treatment in the long term.
                                          Post-traumatic deformity                59


Post-​traumatic deformity
Post-​traumatic facial deformity is a common problem as facial trauma can
be complex to treat and the results are not always ideal. There are many
procedures that can be used to improve the appearance and function of the
face and jaws. A number of factors need to be taken into account.
Patient concerns
Only correct what the patient is actually concerned about.
Timing
Secondary procedures should be delayed until the primary surgery has
healed, and time has taken place for maturation of the hard and soft tissues.
Soft tissues
Facial scars take up to 2 years to mature. Since soft tissue overlying under-​
reduced bone shrinks to fit, the reduced bony volume correction of long-​
standing malunited fractures of the face may never look aesthetic unless
there is simultaneous correction of the soft tissue drape. This may require
augmentation with:
•	Tissue expansion.
• Dermal fillers.
• Dermal grafts.
• Fat grafts.
• Free soft tissue transfer.
Hard tissues
Correction of hard tissue can usually be undertaken with standard
orthognathic techniques, onlay grafts or, rarely, osteotomizing fracture sites.
60
 Chapter 2                            61



Oral cavity and
oropharyngeal cancer
Introduction 62
Anatomy 64
Epidemiology 66
Aetiology 66
Premalignant conditions 67
Diagnosis 68
Investigations 70
Staging 76
Principles of treatment 78
Therapeutic options 80
Surgery 82
Reconstruction 90
Surgical complications 104
Other head and neck cancers 110
Radiotherapy 112
Systemic anticancer therapies 116
Prevention 118
Nutritional support 120
Speech and language therapy 124
Swallowing in oral cancer 126
Psychosocial aspects 130
Health-​related quality of life 132
Palliative care 136
62



     62    Chapter 2     Oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer


          Introduction
          The management of oral and oropharyngeal cancer is a challenge to the
          head and neck surgeon. While oral cancer presents in an environment that
          can be readily examined by patients and professionals alike, oropharyngeal
          tumours lie at the posterior aspect of what is visible and, as such, may often
          present late. Rarely, neglected tumours can cross both anatomical zones
          giving a unique spectrum of clinical presentations.
             Cancer of the oral cavity and oropharynx is most frequently squamous
          cell carcinoma (SCC). Occasionally, rarer tumours can present at this site
          (lymphoma, salivary tumours) or tumours from deeper structures (e.g.
          deep lobe parotid tumours) can present in this anatomical region. This
          chapter will principally consider squamous carcinoma of the head and neck
          presenting in the oral cavity and oropharynx.
Introduction   63
64



     64    Chapter 2      Oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer


          Anatomy
          • The oral cavity commences at the vermillion of the lips and extends
            posteriorly to the oropharynx (Fig. 2.1). It contains the hard palate,
            tooth-​bearing tissues, and anterior two-​thirds of the tongue.
          • The oropharynx is defined as that part of the upper aerodigestive tract
            that commences at the anterior pillar of the fauces, hard/​soft palate
            junction, and the junction of the anterior two-​thirds and the posterior
            one-​third of the tongue. It comprises soft palate, anterior and posterior
            tonsillar pillars, tonsillar fossa, lateral and posterior walls, and the tongue
            base down to the epiglottis (Fig. 2.2 and Fig. 2.3).
          • The surface of both the oral cavity and oropharynx is lined with
            stratified squamous epithelium, from which the most frequently
            presenting tumour arises.
          • Tissues at both sites have very rich lymphatic drainage, which has clinical
            significance in the locoregional spread of malignant disease.
          • Various subsites are considered to have differing prognostic significance
            in the context of carcinoma, e.g. tumours of the palatine arch (anterior
            pillar, soft palate, and uvula) are less aggressive than those of the other
            oral cavity and oropharynx sites.




           Hard palate
                                                                       (Pharyngopalatine
            Soft palate
                                                                       arch)
               Uvula                                                   Palatine tonsil



               Posterior wall




          Fig. 2. Anterior view of oral cavity and oropharynx.
                                                                            Anatomy    65




                                                        Paranasal sinuses

    Nasal cavity



   Oral cavity                                             Nasopharynx


                                                            Oropharynx       Pharynx


                                                            Hypopharynx

   Salivary glands                                            Larynx


                         Trachea                                 Esophagus



Fig. 2.2 Sagittal view of oral cavity and oropharynx.




   Nasal soft palate


                 Uvula


       Tongue base


         Lateral wall


           Epiglottis




Fig. 2.3 Posterior view of oropharynx.
6



    66    Chapter 2     Oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer


         Epidemiology
         • Around 7500 cases of all head and neck cancer types occur in the UK
           per annum, making it the sixth most common form of cancer.
         • ~2600 occur in the oral cavity and ~900 in the oropharynx.
         • In the USA, ~30,100 new diagnoses of oropharynx carcinomas are
           made and an estimated 7800 deaths occur annually.
         • In India, oral cavity and oropharyngeal tumours comprise 40% of
           cancers.
         • There is between two and five times greater incidence in men than in
           women depending on the site.
         • Traditionally, it is most common in the sixth and seventh decades,
           although there is evidence that it is increasing in young adults.


         Aetiology
         • Smoking and consumption of alcohol are the two principal aetiological
           factors in this disease. These factors act separately but also
           synergistically in causing this form of cancer.
         • Diet containing high proportions of vegetables and fruit might modulate
           carcinogenic effects and low body mass index (BMI) appears to increase
           the risk of oropharynx cancer.
         • Human papilloma virus (HPV) is now recognized as an independent
           risk factor for oropharyngeal SCC—​HPV type 16 is the most prevalent
           genotype present in 87% of cases of oropharyngeal squamous
           carcinoma in one large study.
         • Betel quid chewing is related to the high incidence of oral cancer in the
           Indian subcontinent.
         • Premalignant conditions and lesions.
                                             Premalignant conditions           67


Premalignant conditions
Conditions of definite premalignant potential
•	Leucoplakia (Fig. 2.4).
• Erythroplakia.
• Chronic hyperplastic candidiasis.
Conditions associated with an increased risk
of malignant transformation
•	Lichen planus.
• Oral submucous fibrosis.
• Syphilitic glossitis.
• Sideropenic dysphagia.
These include conditions are that not themselves premalignant, but confer
an i rate of malignancy by the atrophy that they produce within the mucous
membranes (see % Lichen planus, p. 462, and % Syphilis, p. 492).
Conditions erroneously considered to be premalignant
• Stomatitis nicotina.
• Habitual cheek biting.
• White sponge naevus.




Fig. 2.4 Oral squamous cell carcinoma presenting in area of a raised area of
speckled leucoplakia or verrucous hyperplasia/​carcinoma.
68



     68       Chapter 2   Oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer


          Diagnosis
          This is made on the basis of clinical features and special investigations.
          Clinical features include symptoms and signs.
          Symptoms
          In early disease, small tumours may produce very few or only specific
          symptoms, and are therefore difficult to detect. Presenting symptoms may
          include:
          • Painless ulcer.
          • Sore throat.
          • Sensation of a foreign body in the throat.
          • Change in voice, otalgia, or odynophagia (pain referred to the ear
             mediated via glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves).
          •	Lump in the neck.
          • Weight loss.
          With increasing tumour size, tongue movement may be impaired, affecting
          speech and swallowing. In late-​stage disease, patients may complain of
          spontaneous bleeding and halitosis.
          Signs
          • Indurated ulcer (Fig. 2.5).
          • Exophytic mass.
          • Area of abnormal mucosa, e.g. red patch.
          • Cervical lymphadenopathy (Fig. 2.6)—​may be reactive or metastatic.
            A metastatic node will classically be:
            • hard;
            • non-​tender;
            • may be fixed to surrounding structures.
          • Alteration of voice.
          • Cranial nerve lesions:
            • hypoglossal palsy (deviation towards affected side with wasting and
               fasciculation of ipsilateral side of tongue);
            • vagus nerve palsy (impaired movement of soft palate, ipsilateral vocal
               cord paralysis);
            • trigeminal nerve anaesthesia in territory supplied by lingual nerve and
               mental nerves.
          Clinical examination must include a methodical examination of the oral
          cavity, as well as the anterior and posterior triangles of the neck. Fibreoptic
          nasendoscopy must always be carried out when an oropharyngeal lesion is
          suspected. This can be carried out under topical anaesthesia.
                                                                    Diagnosis   69




Fig. 2.5 Oral squamous cell carcinoma presenting as an indurated ulcer.




Fig. 2.6 Upper deep cervical lymph node enlargement from oral cavity primary.
70



     70    Chapter 2      Oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer


          Investigations
          Plain radiography
          Plain radiographs have a limited role to play in the diagnosis and preopera-
          tive assessment of oropharyngeal tumours. Nonetheless, they are fre-
          quently performed as part of the diagnostic pathway, particularly in patients
          who present with non-​specific symptoms.
          The orthopantomogram
          • Frequently undertaken as a screening investigation for patients
            presenting with facial pain.
          • A rotational tomogram and, therefore, only of diagnostic value for
            those tissues that lie within the focal trough.
          • Of little practical value in assessing soft tissue pathology.
          • Bony pathology is only demonstrated where significant decalcification
            has occurred as a result of either pressure or direct invasion by a
            malignant process.
          • Occasionally useful in diagnosing the much rarer osteosarcomas where
            characteristic features, including the ‘sunray’ appearance, are almost
            pathognomonic.
          • Bone invasion by the more common SCCs is indicated by loss of cortical
            outlines and irregular areas of radiolucency in either the mandible or
            maxilla (Fig. 2.7). Rarely, resorption of dental roots can also be identified.
          •	Malignant transformation within pre-​existing benign pathology cannot be
            excluded with plain radiology.
          •	Multiple lesions may occur with metastatic bony deposits, such as in
            myeloma or breast carcinoma.
          •	Main value of the OPG in patients with oropharyngeal malignancy is in
            aiding dental assessment prior to surgery or radiotherapy:
            • planning of mandibular resections or access osteotomies must take into
               account the position of the teeth in order to minimize functional disability;
            • extent of caries and periodontal disease can be determined in order
               to ensure that appropriate therapy including dental extractions are
               undertaken preferably at the examination under anaesthesia (EUA)
               stage, and certainly prior to the commencement of major therapeutic
               interventions.
          • Finally, the OPG is used to confirm the appropriate reduction and
            fixation of access mandibulotomies and to ensure that, where
            mandibular reconstruction has been undertaken, bony contour, plate
            position, and accurate location of the condyle within the glenoid fossa
            have all been achieved.
          Occipitomental radiograph
          • Seldom used in modern diagnostic practice outside the realms of facial
            trauma.
          • Occasionally indicated in the investigation of facial pain thought to be of
            maxillary sinus origin.
          • Opacity of maxillary sinus coupled with bony destruction is most
            likely to indicate a malignant process although long-​standing chronic
            suppurative disease (e.g. aspergillosis) can give rise to similar
            appearances.
                                                          Investigations          71




Fig. 2.7 Orthopantomogram demonstrating mandibular invasion in molar region.

Chest radiograph
The preoperative chest radiograph (CXR) still has a number of im-
portant functions in the overall assessment of patients with oropharyngeal
malignancy:
•	Many patients present with cardiorespiratory co-​morbidities and the
  CXR can be a valuable tool in supplementing clinical assessment of
  respiratory and cardiac function.
•	Given the high incidence of post-​treatment complications involving the
  cardiorespiratory system, a pre-​treatment baseline CXR can provide
  invaluable information about the developing clinical picture.
• A CXR may demonstrate pulmonary metastases, although it is not
  as sensitive as other imaging modalities in the detection of smaller
  lesions. Nonetheless, a CXR that demonstrates widespread pulmonary
  metastases at the beginning of the diagnostic pathway may save a great
  deal of unnecessary time and investigation, and allows the patient to
  receive appropriate therapy at a much earlier stage.
• The role of CXR as part of the routine follow-​up of patients following
  definitive therapy is less certain. In general, follow-​up radiography is
  only recommended where symptoms dictate. Follow-​up screening
  for pulmonary metastases or second primary malignancies is not
  recommended.
Contrast radiography
Sialography
While sialography has no role to play in the planned assessment of a pa-
tient with known oropharyngeal malignancy, occasionally patients with
such a malignancy may present with symptoms consistent with obstructive
sialadenitis. It is important to recognize that space-​occupying lesions within
the major salivary glands or extrinsic compression of the ducts may be iden-
tified on sialography.
72



     72    Chapter 2     Oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer

          Carotid angiography
          High-​resolution contrast MRI, duplex ultrasound scans (DUSS), and sub-
          traction angiography have largely superseded the need for carotid angi-
          ography in the preoperative assessment of oropharyngeal malignancy.
          Occasionally, however, where previous neck surgery or radiotherapy has
          been undertaken, angiography may be required in order to assess the pa-
          tency and condition of the vascular tree in order to facilitate appropriate
          reconstructive choice. In highly vascular tumours, embolization may be of
          value as an adjunct to surgery.
          Barium swallow
          This investigation can give useful information about tongue base lesions. It is
          of particular value when coupled with nasoendoscopy in the postoperative
          assessment of swallowing function.
          Cross-​sectional imaging
          Computed tomography
          • High-​resolution CT scanning with and without contrast probably
            represents the best all-​round imaging modality in the preoperative
            assessment and staging of oropharyngeal malignancy.
          • Details of bony anatomy and potential bone involvement by tumour are
            superior to MRI.
          • Single CT scanning of the head, neck, thorax, and upper abdomen allows
            a comprehensive staging scan to be undertaken rapidly at one sitting.
          • In order to assess the paranasal sinuses, coronal scans can be
            undertaken or reformatted and give excellent detail regarding
            involvement of the orbit and cranial base. Sagittal scans can also be of
            value in the frontonasal area.
          • CT is widely available and the criteria for determining the probability of
            nodal involvement is well developed.
          •	Main drawbacks of CT:
            • distortion of images caused by amalgam artefact;
            • limitations of imaging smaller lesions in mobile areas of the oropharynx.
          • While exposure doses have been significantly reduced with modern CT
            machines, this modality still has the disadvantage of subjecting patients
            to ionizing radiation.
          • CT scanning provides a high level of accuracy in assessing the
            involvement of lymph nodes in the neck (Fig. 2.8). The criteria for
            identifying positive neck nodes are:
            • increase in size (short axis >8–​10mm);
            • central necrosis and rim contrast enhancement;
            • extracapsular extension;
            • obliteration of surrounding fat planes.
          • Surpasses plain radiography in diagnostic accuracy for determining the
            presence of pulmonary metastases or early primary lung tumours.
          • Since image acquisition times with modern spiral scanners are short,
            there is little reason for not undertaking chest examination as part of a
            standard head and neck staging protocol.
          • There remains the method of choice for radiotherapy treatment
            planning. However, an additional ‘planning CT scan’ is usually required
            with the patient positioned in the treatment position.
                                                               Investigations    73




Fig. 2.8 Positive node identified on CT by imaging criteria.

Magnetic resonance imaging
• Superior to CT scanning for determining the depth and volume of
  primary soft tissue oropharyngeal tumours.
• Delineates cancellous bone invasion better than CT.
• Not susceptible to dental amalgam artefact.
• No exposure to ionizing radiation.
• Coupled with administration of gadolinium gives excellent information
  about potential proximity to vascular and neural structures.
• Acquisition times greater than for CT.
• Some patients find it unbearably claustrophobic and noisy.
• High false-​positive rate when assessing patients for recurrent tumour
  following therapeutic intervention.
• High-​resolution MRI scans can be of particular benefit in identifying small
  nasopharyngeal tumours and recurrence at the base of the skull.
• Investigation of choice for assessing primary salivary gland malignancies
  and in particular is of value for identifying perineural spread.
•	Gives almost equivalent accuracy to CT for detecting cervical node
  metastases (criteria used to determine nodal involvement are similar
  to CT).
• Contraindicated in the presence of ferrous implants.
74



     74    Chapter 2     Oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer

          Nuclear medicine
          Bone scintigraphy
          • Radioisotope scanning with technetium 99-​labelled methylene
            diphosphonate (MDP) can be of benefit in determining whether early
            bony invasion exists.
          • Computerized co-​location on sectional anatomical images can be
            of benefit in identifying areas of bony invasion where no change is
            identified on either the CT or plain radiographs.
          • Highly sensitive test and false positives may occur where there is active
            dental pathology, if there has been a recent biopsy, or where there is
            simply a periosteal reaction.
          • Results of scintigraphy should be considered in the context of the clinical
            picture and other investigations. When positive, but where significant
            clinical doubt exists, an intraoperative periosteal strip should be
            performed before committing the patient to a segmental bone resection.
          • Also of value in assessing the viability of microvascular free bone
            transfers in the postoperative period.
          Positron emission tomography
          • Positron emission tomography (PET) provides a functional assessment
            of tissue metabolism using radiolabelled fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG).
          • Best when combined with CT (PET-​CT) as this co-​localizes images
            anatomically.
          • Should give the maximum diagnostic information by distinguishing
            between the metabolic behaviour of cancer and normal tissues.
          • Studies in the head and neck indicate that this test has a high diagnostic
            accuracy particularly for:
            • detecting primaries of unknown origin;
            • detecting tumour recurrence by distinguishing between active tumour
                and post-​treatment scar tissue.
          • Requires the use of radiolabelled products that only have a short half-​
            life—​therefore expensive.
          • At present, PET should be reserved for selected cases where a primary
            cannot be identified or where tumour recurrence is suspected, but
            cannot be detected by other methods. Patients should be considered
            for entry into ongoing clinical trials.
          • It is important that no therapeutic intervention or biopsy has been
            recently undertaken in order to limit the false-​positive rate.
          • Can be used to delineate retained secretions from malignant infiltration
            in paranasal sinus disease.
          Ultrasonography
          • Diagnostic ultrasound has become an important adjunct to the clinical
            assessment of neck masses—​it does not replace the requirement for
            either a CT or MRI scan since these give much more anatomical detail
            and permit staging of the neck, thorax, and abdomen.
          • Accurate determination of the size and morphology of neck masses
            can be made, and in many cases normal and abnormal architecture of
            cervical lymph nodes can be assessed.
          • When used in conjunction with fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC)
            or biopsy (FNAB), it enhances diagnostic yields.
                                                         Investigations          75


• DUSS of value in assessing the patency of the vascular tree and
  vascularity of the tumour.
• Does not expose the patient to ionizing radiation or strong magnetic fields.
• Simple to undertake.
• Highly operator dependent. Real-​time imaging provides much more
  valuable information than can be conveyed in static images.
• Has a high diagnostic accuracy in the detection of salivary gland
  tumours; however, its ability to discriminate between benign and
  malignant tumours is less certain.
• If coupled with FNAC or FNAB, USS diagnostic accuracy for salivary
  neoplasms is improved, but high false-​positive and false-​negative rates
  for cytology still exist such that radical surgery cannot be justified
  on the basis of USS and cytology alone (however, demonstration of
  diffuse enlargement of a gland may justify incisional biopsy to distinguish
  an inflammatory process from lymphoma). USS can be of benefit in
  monitoring patients with Sjögren’s syndrome and assess whether a
  discrete lymphoma is developing within sialectatic salivary tissue (see
  % Sjögren’s syndrome, p. 190).
Fine needle aspiration for cytology or core biopsy
FNAC
• Of benefit when abnormal squamous cells are identified from aspiration
  of a mass in the neck—​triggers diagnostic pathway in search of a
  primary oropharyngeal malignancy. Where a metastasis from a mucosal
  malignancy is suspected, every attempt should be made to reach a
  sound diagnosis without resort to compromising the neck with open
  surgery.
• Where abnormal lymphocytes are identified suggesting lymphoreticular
  malignancy, cytology is rarely sufficient to determine the most
  appropriate therapy—​next most appropriate diagnostic step is excision
  biopsy through a defensive neck incision (where the approach allows for
  a future neck dissection (ND)).
• Risk of seeding using FNAC is believed to be extremely remote—​
  nonetheless, where there is unequivocal histological diagnosis of the
  primary tumour, and imaging of the neck demonstrates abnormal nodes
  on size or architectural criteria, any additional information obtained by
  FNAC is of questionable benefit as it is unlikely to influence therapeutic
  decisions.
FNAB
• Core biopsy offers greater information regarding tumours because it
  provides not only evidence of abnormal cytology, but also information
  regarding the histology of the tissue.
• Occasionally will provide sufficient information regarding lymphomas to
  initiate treatment without resort to formal nodal excision biopsy.
• Samples can undergo P16 evaluation which can be of use in identifying
  the presumed site of an unknown primary, e.g. oropharynx.
• Samples can undergo BRAF gene testing for head and neck melanoma
  work-​up.
• Theoretical risk of seeding using this technique, but there is no evidence
  to demonstrate a true risk.
76



     76    Chapter 2    Oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer


          Staging
          See % Further reading, p. 140 for recommended additional reading:
          •	Union for International Cancer Control (UICC): TNM classification of
            malignant tumours, 8th edition (Brierley et al., 2016)
          • American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC): AJCC cancer staging
            manual, 8th edition (Amin et al., 2017).
Staging   77
78



     78    Chapter 2    Oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer


          Principles of treatment
          Treatment intent—​to cure or palliate?
          • Having established a diagnosis of oral or oropharyngeal malignancy,
            the histological type, and the stage of disease, it is important to take
            account of the overall physical and mental state of the patient.
          • The relative risks and benefits of the various treatment options should
            be identified and it should be ensured that the patient, and preferably
            also their relatives and carers, fully understand the implications of
            treatment and are in a position to make an informed choice.
          • Where remediable factors exist in terms of general co-​morbidities,
            these should be addressed prior to treatment decisions. Commonly
            used measures are performance status and the Adult Comorbidity
            Evaluation 27 (ACE-​27) co-​morbidity index.
          • Treatment involves three potential modalities:
            • surgery;
            • radiotherapy;
            • chemotherapy.
          • Achieving locoregional control is key and relates directly to overall
            survival.
          •	Management of the primary cancer can be either surgical or by
            radiotherapy, and remains controversial. Surgery is often combined with
            adjuvant radiotherapy based on histopathological outcomes of surgical
            resection and ND if performed.
          • Ionizing radiation and chemotherapy are used increasingly for this
            patient group as a combined modality, either in the primary setting
            for oropharyngeal disease or as adjuvant treatment after oral cancer
            surgery with poor prognostic histological features such as positive
            margins or extracapsular spread from lymph nodes.
          •	Management of stage III and IV resectable oropharynx cancer—​there
            has been only one prospective randomized controlled trial (RCT)
            comparing chemoradiotherapy with primary surgery plus adjuvant
            therapy.
          • In early disease, surgery and primary radiotherapy are equally effective
            in eradicating primary disease and both should be offered if there is
            no evidence of neck disease (National Institute for Health and Care
            Excellence (NICE) guidance).
          • All surgical complications are well known to be far more prevalent and
            complex in the post-​radiotherapy patient.
          • Quality of life (QOL) should be considered alongside the chances of
            survival.
          • All members of the multidisciplinary team (MDT) should have the
            opportunity to express their views about treatment options from their
            own perspectives. A designated member of the team should take a
            lead role and ultimately be responsibility for the management of an
            individual patient’s care together with a named key worker (usually
            allied healthcare such as clinical nurse specialist).
                                              Principles of treatment             79


• A head and neck MDT should comprise of:
   • oral and maxillofacial surgeons;
   • ear, nose, and throat (ENT) surgeons;
   • reconstructive surgeons (oral and maxillofacial surgery (OMFS), ENT,
      or plastic);
   • specialist anaesthetists;
   • clinical/​medical oncologists;
   • specialist nurses;
   • speech and language therapists;
   • palliative care physicians;
   • specialist radiologists;
   • specialist pathologists;
   • dieticians;
   • restorative dentists;
   • dental hygienists;
   • psychologists.

Having weighed the evidence and discussed all the treatment options with
the patient, it is vital that the intention of treatment is clearly understood
by the whole team, patient, and carers. Where treatment is given with pal-
liative intent, it is important that this is targeted at the specific relief or
prevention of symptoms, and that the treatment is designed to minimize
side effects. Regular reassessment is required to ensure that therapeutic
goals are being achieved and that the side effects of treatment are not
outweighing the benefits. There must be a clear evidence-​based stepwise
strategy for managing common symptoms such as pain and nausea.
   When appropriate, advance life directives should be discussed and an
end of life resuscitation policy agreed with the patient and preferably carers.
80



     80    Chapter 2      Oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer


          Therapeutic options
          The overwhelming majority of oral and oropharyngeal cancers are mucosal
          SCCs. Most of the discussion regarding therapeutic options will be directed
          to the management of these relatively common tumours. There are three
          main treatment modalities to consider:
          • Surgery.
          • Radiotherapy (RT).
          • Systemic anticancer therapies (SACTs).
          These modalities can be used in isolation or combination. When used in
          combination, surgical resection normally precedes adjuvant radiotherapy
          as post-​irradiation surgical resection carries with it a much higher risk of
          complications. Primary chemoradiation may be indicated for certain tongue
          base and tonsillar tumours. However, the use of chemotherapy as a stand-​
          alone primary modality or as adjuvant treatment with surgery is often only
          undertaken in the context of clinical trials or palliation. It is not possible to
          consider every permutation and combination, but the following factors all
          have a bearing on the choice of treatment:
          • Site of primary tumour.
          • Stage of disease.
          • Proximity or involvement of bone.
          • Treatment intent.
          • Physical status of patient.
          • Patient preference.
          As far as the physical status of the patient is concerned, a number of risk
          stratification models are available to assist the MDT in advising the patient.
          At the simplest level, the American Society of Anaesthesiologists (ASA)
          I–​V scale gives a reasonable prediction of the risk of morbidity and mor-
          tality (see % Anaesthesia, p. 402). Other co-​morbidity stratifications include
          performance status and the ACE-​       27 co-​ morbidity index. Preoperative
          risk stratification not only assists in choosing the modality of treatment
          and even the extent of surgery, but is also a prerequisite for meaningful
          comparative audit.
Therapeutic options   81
82



     82    Chapter 2       Oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer


          Surgery
          There are a number of different options available under the banner of surgery:
          • Conventional excision.
          •	Laser surgery.
          • Thermal surgery.
          The primary site
          • Choice of primary modality treatment depends upon the tumour
            site and histological features, coupled with the stage of disease and
            ultimately patient choice.
          • Size and location of tumour will determine whether a resection
            followed by primary closure or healing by secondary intention will be
            satisfactory, or whether reconstruction of the defect with a local or
            distant tissue will be necessary to restore form and function.
          • In borderline cases there may have to be careful consideration of the
            trade-​off between loss of function and the risks of the procedure.
          Access to the primary tumour
          Many tumours in the anterior part of the oral cavity can be accessed via the
          transoral route. This is ideal since the oral sphincter is maintained and no
          scars are produced above the jaw line. The cosmetic result is usually excellent.
          However, as tumours increase in size and as their position becomes more pos-
          terior, it may not be feasible to undertake a safe resection via the transoral route.
          Three main alternatives exist to achieve access under these circumstances:
          •	Lip split and mandibulotomy (Fig. 2.9 and Fig. 2.10).
          • A ‘pull through’ technique via the neck.
          • For maxillary tumours, an upper lip and paranasal incision (lateral
             infraorbital extension is rarely required and has a high complication rate).
          • Transoral robotic surgery may be of benefit in performing ablative
             surgery, in an otherwise inaccessible site. However, this technique
             is still under evaluation and should be restricted to a small number
             of specialist centres as experience grows, techniques develop, and
             standardized training programmes are evaluated.
          There are several options for the lip skin incision. However, in most circum-
          stances, some form of stepped incision is desirable both in the upper and
          lower lip. This disguises and lengthens the scar to prevent postoperative
          wound contraction, which otherwise distorts the vermilion border. After a
          lengthy operation, the tissues can become oedematous by the time closure
          is undertaken and it is therefore advisable to mark the skin with methylene
          blue temporary tattoos prior to incision in order to ensure accurate ap-
          position during closure. It is also important to ensure that the orbicularis
          muscles are correctly realigned in order to maintain an effective oral
          sphincter and prevent unsightly postoperative clefting of the lip.
          Ablation
          • Effective tumour ablation is achieved by ensuring that good visibility is
            maintained. This in turn results from appropriate access.
          • In order to maximize the chances of achieving complete tumour
            resection with a clear margin of normal tissue, the surgeon must employ
            both visual inspection and palpation.
                                                                 Surgery        83




Fig. 2.9 Operative photograph of lip split and mandibulotomy.

• The method of cutting (cold steel, harmonic scalpel, laser, diathermy, or
  coblation (‘controlled ablation’)) is, to some extent, a matter of personal
  preference. In many cases, a combination of techniques will be used.
• For some small and superficial lesions laser vaporization may be employed;
  however, this does not permit histological assessment of the adequacy of
  tumour resection. Similarly, lasers and thermal techniques, while reducing
  the amount of intraoperative bleeding, cause morphological distortion of
  tissues at the margins, which can lead to histological artefacts and some
  difficulty in assessing the adequacy of tumour resection.
• Coblation involves the generation of bipolar radiofrequency waves
  that generate tissue temperatures of around 60°C, much lower than
  temperatures generated by conventional diathermy. This is claimed to
  reduce postoperative pain, but the technique has been associated with
  i levels of postoperative haemorrhage. It should therefore only be used
  by surgeons who have had specific training in its use.
•	Use of intraoperative frozen sections to assist marginal clearance is
  controversial:
  • given that the primary aim is tumour resection with a clearance
     preferably with clinical margin of 1cm (vital structures permitting), if
     the surgeon believes that close or positive margins could be possible
     then a wider resection should be undertaken if feasible;
  • random frozen sections are unlikely to be able to identify positive
     margins;
  • they may give a false sense of security to the surgeon and invariably
     prolong the operative time.
84



     84    Chapter 2          Oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer

                          Cut edge of
                           mandible




                                                                   Tumour
                  Superior                                               Oral
                 constrictor                                             tongue
                   muscle




                   Internal
                    jugular
                      vein                                         Cut edge of
                                                                    mandible


                                                     Cut edge of
                         Commom                      mylohyoid
                        facial nerve
                                  Commom         Thyrohyoid
                                   carotid
                                   artery

          Fig. 2.0 Line diagram of Fig. 2.9.

          • Intraoperative tumour tissue marking has been attempted (e.g. toluidine
            blue), but this has limited value in detecting mucosal margin clearance
            because of the high false-​positive rate. The technique is unsuitable for
            detecting deep margin clearance (area where resection is most likely to
            be inadequate).
          • Where bony resection is required, the extent is largely based on the
            clinical and radiological findings:
            • extensive subcortical spread of tumour within the mandible
               is a relatively rare phenomenon, but will usually be suspected
               preoperatively;
            • prior to bone resection, a titanium reconstruction plate is fashioned
               to restore the contour of the resected bone (plate extended well
               beyond planned resection site in order to provide adequate fixation
               of the bone graft); unless tumour involvement of the lateral tissue
               prevents adaptation.
          • For posterior oropharyngeal tumours, it is important to visualize the
            great vessels of the neck up to the skull base and ensure that these are
            lateralized prior to resection of the primary tumour in order to avoid
            inadvertent damage.
          • In rare instances where there is true tumour invasion of the major
            vessels, carotid resection is seldom warranted as the complications are
            severe, and neither palliation nor survival is enhanced.
                                                                  Surgery        85


• Following resection and prior to reconstruction, it is of vital importance
  that meticulous haemostasis is achieved:
  • the anaesthetist should be asked to restore the preoperative blood
    pressure (BP) if hypotension has deliberately been employed;
  • the patient should be tipped head down to enhance identification of
    potential bleeding.
Photodynamic therapy
• Advocated as a technique that causes selective tumour destruction by
  cell apoptosis with minimal scarring and preservation of uninvolved
  tissue (thereby minimizing functional deficit).
• Photosensitizing agents currently available are insufficiently selective to
  prevent normal tissue damage.
• Patients must be protected from exposure to sunlight for several days.
• Following tumour ablation, the wound sloughs and heals by secondary
  intention and scarring.
• There does not appear to be any benefit of this technique over the more
  traditional resection methods and postoperative pain, rapid necrosis, and
  bleeding is reported to be more prevalent using this technique.
The neck
• Several classifications of neck dissection (ND) are in existence.
• The term radical ND should only apply to the classical ND described
  by Crile, which involves resection of the lymph nodes in level I–​V of the
  neck together with sacrifice of:
  • sternocleidomastoid muscle (SCM);
  • spinal accessory nerve (SAN);
  • internal jugular vein (IJV).
• All other NDs are selective and best described by the levels of lymph nodes
  resected, and which of the vital structures have been sacrificed, e.g. level
  I–​IV with resection of IJV. This avoids confusion regarding the meaning of
  terms such as modified radical, functional, comprehensive, supra-​omohyoid,
  and extended, which are all open to interpretation and lack clarity.
• Whether elective (staging ND in cN0) or therapeutic (ND in clinically
  or radiologically N+ disease) most NDs performed today preserve the
  vital structures of the neck to minimize functional deficit. The following
  structures are preserved unless they are directly invaded by tumour:
  • SCM;
  • carotid artery;
  • IJV;
  • SAN;
  • vagus;
  • laryngeal nerves;
  • sympathetic chain;
  • phrenic nerve;
  • thoracic duct;
  • cervical plexus;
  • hypoglossal nerve;
  • lingual nerve;
  • mandibular branch of the facial nerve.
86



     86    Chapter 2     Oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer

          Neck access
          There are four main types of incision described to access the neck:
          • Apron.
          • Wine glass.
          • ‘H’.
          •	MacFee.
          In most situations some form of the apron incision is the most appropriate.
          This should be raised in the subplatysmal plane unless tumour invasion dic-
          tates otherwise. The subcutaneous blood supply is derived from a plexus
          of vessels with a vertical axis and therefore the MacFee (parallel transverse)
          incision, although preserving a bi-​pedicle skin flap, does not make best use
          of the skin blood supply and produces poorer access to the neck. The ‘H’
          and wine glass incision both give excellent access, but create points with
          reduced blood supply, which often lie over underlying vital structures. The
          risks of breakdown and bleeding are enhanced when ND is being per-
          formed as a salvage procedure after previous radiotherapy. Where a pre-
          vious incision has been made in the neck, this should normally be excised
          and the neck incision planned around this.
          Elective neck dissection
          • Where there is no clinical or radiological evidence of nodal involvement,
             elective neck dissection (END) may be indicated because up to 25–​30%
             of patients with tumours of the floor of mouth or tongue will have
             occult micrometastases.
          • Access to the neck is also often required in order to facilitate
             microvascular reconstruction—​under either of these circumstances
             a ND will be indicated unless the patient is not fit enough for major
             surgery, when a simple local resection and ‘watch and wait policy’ can
             be employed.
          •	Level 1 evidence confirms the survival advantage of END over a ‘watch
             and wait’ policy in the clinically and radiologically normal neck in early
             oral cavity carcinoma and is reflected in the NICE NG36 guidance
             regarding ND for tongue and floor of mouth SCC (see % Further
             reading, p. 141).
          • Further benefit arising from END is accurate pathological staging of the
             neck that helps inform the need for adjuvant radiotherapy and increases
             prognostic accuracy.
          • The extent of END determined by the site and size of the primary
             tumour, e.g. in anterior tumours:
            • ND should harvest levels I–​IV (accounts for the possibility of skip
               lesions in level IV—​particular phenomenon associated with primary
               tumours of the tongue and floor of mouth);
            • incidence of spread to level IIb (above the SAN) is very low—​
               therefore only included in large, posterior tumours;
            • incidence of spread to level V in N0 neck is very low (1–​3%)—​
               therefore, level V not usually removed because morbidity to shoulder
               arising from devascularization of the SAN is high.
          • If metastases are detected pathologically in levels I–​IV (more than one
             positive node or any positive node with extracapsular spotted), then
             postoperative adjuvant radiotherapy is usually employed to include
             level V.
                                                                Surgery        87


Sentinel node biopsy
• Advocated by some for the N0 neck.
• See NICE NG36 guidance regarding ND for tongue and floor of mouth
  SCC (see % Further reading, p. 141).
• Injection of radiolabelled dye 1 day preoperatively of the primary
  tumour area with intraoperative blue dye injected at the time of surgery.
• This then drains to the lymph nodes in the same order that tumour
  would spread.
•	Gamma camera then used to determine the pattern of lymph node
  drainage for that tumour.
• Small incision made in the neck and the dye-​bearing node(s) with high
  gamma signal excised and submitted for histology.
• If metastasis subsequently detected pathologically, formal END is
  undertaken at a second operation.
• Application of technique to oropharyngeal malignancies still under
  evaluation.
• The recent surgical consensus guidelines (2018) also support the
  use of sentinel node biopsy (SNB) for recurrent SCC and for cases
  of incidental foci of SCC in wide resections of severe dysplasia (see
  % Further reading, p. 141).
Therapeutic neck dissection
• Where the neck is N+.
• Where there is extensive disease in the neck with invasion of the SCM,
  SAN, and IJV, a radical ND is justified. On occasion, it is necessary to
  extend the dissection beyond the boundaries defined by Crile (extended
  radical neck dissection (RND)).
• In other N+ cases, a selective ND is indicated with preservation of as
  many vital structures as possible. In the majority of cases, clear tissue
  planes between the vital structures and involved nodes are preserved,
  which means that some preservation of function is feasible.
• Occasionally, it is not possible to safely resect involved nodes from a
  vital structure and, at that point, the ND should include the involved
  structure. This should be tailored to each individual patient. While
  preoperative imaging may give some idea about the likelihood of
  involvement, it is not infallible and often the decision will have to be
  made at operation.
• If this inclusion involves SCM, IJV, and SAN, and levels I–​V, the ND is
  said to be ‘radicalized’.
• Care should be taken when undertaking the ND to avoid unnecessary
  sacrifice of vessels that may have potential value for reconstruction—​
  this should never take precedence, risking compromise of tumour
  resection.
• Neck coverage with vascularized tissue should be considered after
  radical ND (particularly in the salvage post-​chemoradiotherapy or -​
  radiotherapy settings or when neck skin is sacrificed).
Tracheostomy
The majority of patients who undergo resection of oral and oropharyn-
geal tumours and ND do not require an elective tracheostomy provided
that a level 3 critical care facility is available for the management of the
8



    88    Chapter 2     Oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer

         patient in the immediate postoperative period. Where there has been a
         large oropharyngeal resection and reconstruction, it is prudent to under-
         take a nasoendoscopic assessment of the airway prior to extubation.
         Occasionally, where the anaesthetist has assessed the intubation as diffi-
         cult, it may be prudent to undertake an elective tracheostomy. Some units
         undertake elective tracheostomy where a bilateral ND or a large posterior
         resection has been carried out.
            Where patients are taken back to theatre for re-​exploration of the neck
         for flap insufficiency or bleeding, it is usually wise to undertake a trache-
         ostomy at that stage as swelling is likely to be much more significant (see
         % Anaesthesia, p. 402).
Surgery   89
90



     90    Chapter 2     Oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer


          Reconstruction
          There have been major advances in this area over the last three decades.
          Previously, techniques available to repair defects following cancer ablation
          were limited. Patients were left deformed with little function. The use of free
          tissue transfer had transformed cancer treatment by extending what can be
          safely resected and with the resulting reconstruction, improved QOL.
             The oral cavity and the oropharynx have many important functional
          roles. Resection of any tumour in this region may impact function. The key
          functions to preserve with reconstruction of oropharyngeal cancer defects
          include:
          • Speech.
          • Swallowing.
          • Eating.
          • Chewing.
          • Sensation.
          • Cosmesis.
          Reconstruction: issues to consider
          The choice of reconstruction technique will depend on:
          • Defect: site and size.
          • Type(s) of tissue required.
          • Patient factors:
            • general fitness;
            • existing medical problems;
            • suitability of donor site;
            • patient’s preference.
          • Resources available.
          • Previous treatments—​surgery and/​or radiotherapy, e.g. vessel
            depletion.
          General principles of reconstruction
          • Replace like with like.
          • Keep it simple.
          • Immediate reconstruction is better than delayed.
          •	Minimize donor site morbidity.
          • Resection to achieve clear margins must not be compromised to enable
            easier reconstruction.
          Reconstructive ladder
          The techniques available for repair are usually described as a reconstructive
          ladder, with simple techniques at the bottom rung (less effort/​expertise)
          and more complex ones higher up. The success of reconstruction may be
          compromised by bleeding, haematoma, breakdown of wound, and infec-
          tion. A more complex treatment, such as free tissue transfer, is an all-​or-​
          none phenomenon—​its failure will result in a persisting defect, donor site
          morbidity, and a weaker patient.
          Reconstructive techniques
          The techniques available are described as follows in order from simple to
          more complex.
                                                         Reconstruction              91


Open wound
A laser bed wound is left open and heals with good mucosa coverage and
minimal contracture. Conventional non-​laser wounds, if left open, will heal
slowly, with a combination of contracture and re-​epithelialization. The re-
sultant scar is poor, deformed, and may have a deleterious affect function.
Primary closure
• Ideal for small defects where the edges of the wound can be advanced
   for closure, enabling healing by primary intention.
• No donor site morbidity with maximal preservation of function and
   cosmesis.
•	Use limited to small defects with lax adjacent tissues to advance for
   closure. Excessive tension to achieve primary closure may result in
   distortion, dehiscence, and widened scar.
Graft
This involves using a piece of tissue (e.g. mucosa, skin graft, or bone) re-
moved from its original donor site and transferred to a recipient site where
it gains a new blood supply from the wound bed. The graft is usually har-
vested from the same individual (autograft), but may be from another
individual of the same species (allograft) or even a different species (xeno-
graft). A graft cannot be used if the recipient bed is absent (through and
through defect) or hostile (no prospect of revascularization).
• Mucosal grafts:
   • can be harvested from buccal mucosa (primary closure) or hard
      palate (allowed to re-​epithelialize);
   • good match for mucosal repair;
   • easy to harvest;
   • healing of donor site may cause further distortion of the oral cavity.
• Split-​thickness skin graft:
   • epidermis and part of dermis taken with a manual or electric
      dermatome knife;
   • donor site left to re-​epithelialize;
   • high success rate as little tissue thickness is required for
      revascularization, but has minimal intrinsic features and may contract;
   • donor site (e.g. thigh, upper arm) can be sore, requires dressing for
      several weeks, and has a paler appearance in the long term.
• Full-​thickness skin graft:
   • Reliable, but the success rate is slightly less than partial thickness
      counterpart;
   • better appearance than partial-​thickness graft;
   • donor site (pre-​or postauricular, supraclavicular, abdomen) closed
      primarily.
• Bone:
   • cancellous blocks (rich in osteogenic material), cortico-​cancellous
      blocks, or cortical pieces;
   • long-​established technique that provides rigid scaffolding
      (osteoconductive), whereby the bony structure is gradually replaced
      by new bone formation;
   • variety of donor sites, e.g. mandible, iliac crest, rib, tibia, or calvarium;
   • can be used for repairing bony defects, and to augment or reconstruct
      discontinuity;
92



     92    Chapter 2      Oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer

            • as non-​vascularized requires immobilization and a healthy vascular bed
              to take (radiotherapy will result in subsequent loss);
            • in addition to generic operative side effects/​possible complications
              (bleeding, haematoma, dehiscence, infection, and scarring), each
              donor site will have some specific morbidity, e.g. anterior iliac crest
              (numbness side of leg and groin, aching, and deformity).
          • Cartilage grafts:
            • used in reconstruction of composite ear or nose defects;
            • usually harvested from the patient and has a good success rate if
              covered due to its low metabolic requirements;
            • can be harvested from nose, ear, and rib as a composite graft with
              skin/​mucosa.
          • Nerve and vein grafts:
            • occasionally required and often taken locally, e.g. as part of flap
              harvest, great auricular nerve, or external jugular vein;
            • fascial grafts provide a band of firm tissue (from temporalis area or
              fascia lata of thigh) for use as slings or craniofacial dural repair.
          Flaps
          A flap is a piece of tissue retaining its attached vascular supply transferred
          to repair a defect within reach. Unlike a graft it is not dependent on initial
          revascularization since its blood supply is maintained. This also enables a more
          substantial bulk of tissue to be used, providing structure form and volume.
             The vascular supply of a flap can be random or axial in pattern. The
          random pattern flap relies on subcutaneous vasculature. This limits the de-
          sign of the length of flap before distal necrosis occurs (usually base width
          equal to length, but can be longer with the rich blood supply in the head and
          neck region). An axial pattern with specific associated vessels means a larger
          and longer flap can be raised safely.
          Local flaps
          There are many local flaps that can be used for defects around the face, oral
          cavity, and pharynx, as well as the neck. Examples include:
          • Local intraoral options—​buccal mucosal advancement/​rotational flaps,
            tongue flap, palatal mucosal flap, and buccal fat pad flap. Suitable for
            small adjacent defects. Ease of harvest of a local flap and its matching
            tissue characteristics is offset by its limitation of size. Too large a harvest
            can distort anatomy and compromise function;
          • Nasolabial flap—​random finger of skin taken from the nasolabial fold
            (primary closure of donor site with good resultant cosmesis) is turned
            into the oral cavity through a created opening in the cheek and buccal
            mucosa. Can be used to repair small defects (buccal, alveolus, and
            floor of mouth). The inferiorly based pedicle is divided 2–​3 weeks after
            gaining co-​lateral vascularization from the bed of the defect. When
            used bilaterally can repair anterior floor of mouth while retaining good
            function of the tongue;
          • Karapandzic flaps—​this sensate flap closes lower lip defects of up to
            60% by advancing adjacent tissue, while preserving the perioral vascular
            ring and nerves (blunt muscular dissection technique). Microstomia can
            be a problem. There are numerous other rotational/​advancement flaps
            for lip defects.
                                                           Reconstruction              93


Regional flaps
• Temporoparietal fascia flap—​based on the superficial temporal vessels,
  reflected over the zygomatic arch to reconstruct small defects in the upper
  cheek, pharynx, and palate. Limited by its vascularity of the distal fascial ends.
• Temporalis flap—​muscle flap based on deep temporal vessels, reflected
  over the zygomatic arch to reconstruct small defects in the upper cheek,
  pharynx, and palate. Limited by its arc of rotation. Has a role in facial
  reanimation.
• Paramedian forehead flap—​most often designed with the base centred
  over one of the supratrochlear arteries. With the main arterial
  pedicle, it is possible to raise and transfer a large amount of skin and
  subcutaneous tissue, on a pedicle as narrow as 1.2cm. The narrow
  pedicle increases mobility and adaptability of transposition around the
  pivot point and more effective arcs of rotation. It also allows primary
  closure in the inferior portion of the donor site. It can be used to
  reconstruct nasal, orbital, or midfacial defects that require coverage.
Distant flaps
• Pectoralis major myocutaneous flap—​workhorse, pedicled non-​
  microvascular option in reconstruction of medium to large oral
  defects. Provides large muscle and associated chest wall skin based on
  the pectoral branch of the thoracoacromial artery. Often raised as a
  myocutaneous (muscle and skin) or muscle-​only flap, reflected over
  the clavicle into the neck, and can reach up to the zygomatic arch.
  Donor site is primarily closed. Reliable and can be raised without need
  to change position of patient on table for oral cancer ablation. Its bulk
  is both advantageous (protect neck vessels, good for big defects) and
  disadvantageous (too rigid for defects requiring a more pliable repair).
  The shoulder function can be impaired when combined with radical ND.
• Deltopectoral flap—​two-​stage fasciocutaneous flap medially based
  on two to three perforating branches of the internal mammary artery.
  Limited by its reach into only the lower half of the oral cavity and face.
  When collateral vascularization is achieved at 2–​3 weeks, the tubed
  pedicle is divided and repositioned. The donor site defect is skin grafted
  (split-​thickness). Superseded by other options but worth considering as
  a fall-​back in rare circumstances.
• Dorsal scapular flap—​based on the distal aspect of the transverse
  cervical vessels as they travel deep to the trapezius muscle extending
  down the lateral back in a vertical manner. Raised as a myocutaneous
  flap similar to the pectoralis major surgical technique.
Free flap
• Involves harvesting a flap of soft tissue or bone with its associated
   vascular supply, detaching it and re-​anastomosing with donor vessels
   in the neck using microsurgical techniques (loupes or microscope).
   Surgery is complex and technically challenging. However, the type of
   tissue available for repair is no longer restricted by its ability to reach
   the defect. Success rate is high (around 95%) in specialized units.
   Postoperative monitoring is essential as a haematoma or venous
   thrombosis can threaten the viability of the flap.
There are many flaps suitable for oral and oropharyngeal defects following
cancer ablation.
94



     94    Chapter 2      Oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer

          Four common free flaps used
          Radial forearm flap
          This is a distal skin paddle of the forearm based on a pedicle of the radial ar-
          tery, vena comitantes, and/​or superficial subcutaneous vein (Fig. 2.11). The
          soft pliable skin paddle provides a good reconstruction for small to medium
          oropharyngeal defects, enabling the residual tissue (e.g. tongue, floor of
          mouth) to function. The skin paddle is usually taken from the volar surface.
          • Indications and strengths:
            • workhorse for oral soft tissue defects;
            • provides thin, pliable skin paddle with reliable long vascular pedicle;
            • good size vessels;
            • easy to raise;
            • permits two-​team operating.
          • Modifications:
            • can include vascularized bone (part of radius, risk of fracture in one-​
               fifth of cases, but can reduce with prophylactic plating);
            • nerve (innervation);
            • tendon (sling effect with palmaris longus);
            • usually fasciocutaneous—​can be suprafascial or fascia only.
          • Preoperative assessment:
            • use non-​dominant forearm;
            • check no previous surgery/​injury or Raynaud’s disease;
            • ensure normal (negative) Allen’s test for patency of radial artery,
               ulnar artery, and collateral palmar arch;
            • if in doubt, use Doppler duplex assessment to investigate further,
               another limb, or another flap;
            • ensure no venepuncture made in the donor arm.




          Fig. 2. Composite radial forearm free flap.
                                                        Reconstruction              95


• Positioning:
  • supine with arm extended on side support board (<90°);
  • tourniquet applied to arm (above elbow), but do not inflate until flap
    is marked and ready to start harvesting.
• Preparation:
  • radial artery is palpated and skin paddle is marked out;
  • forearm is elevated and the tourniquet inflated to twice the systolic
    BP (usually 200–​250mmHg).
• Procedure:
  • dissection of skin paddle commenced on ulnar border of flap;
  • incise skin, fat, and fascia to underlying muscle (watch for superficial
    ulnar vessels ~2%);
  • haemostasis achieved with bipolar diathermy or ligation;
  • para-​tenon left intact to maximize skin graft take;
  • dissection continued until the condensation of the intermuscular
    septum between brachioradialis and flexor carpi radialis is reached
    (median nerve sits deep to the flexor muscles);
  • flap must be raised with care to preserve the connection between
    radial pedicle and skin flap;
  • distal and radial side of skin flap is raised;
  • brachioradialis tendon is used to guide dissection on radial side of
    flap/​pedicle;
  • radial artery and venae comitantes at the distal end of the skin paddle
    are ligated and divided;
  • the skin paddle and associated radial pedicle is then elevated
    proximally, preserving the cephalic venous system if required;
  • preserve superficial radial nerve if possible;
  • perforators from the radial pedicle run into the adjacent muscles at
    regular intervals—​they should be controlled with bipolar diathermy or
    ligation well away from the pedicle at the muscle surface;
  • once the flap is raised to an adequate length, the tourniquet is
    released, any bleeding controlled and the flap left to perfuse for at
    least 20min;
  • adequate residual circulation to the hand should be ensured at this
    stage; when ready for transfer the pedicle is divided.
• Closure:
  • donor site is closed primarily apart from the distal end;
  • skin paddle site is repaired with a full-​thickness skin graft (VY skin
    graft or abdominal skin graft), split-​thickness skin graft, or local (ulnar)
    transposition flap;
  • the skin graft is pressure dressed;
  • a backslab can be applied to improve skin graft take.
• Postoperative care:
  • elevate limb in a Bradford sling for 2 days with regular checks on hand
    viability;
  • the transferred flap is also monitored regularly (Fig. 2.12);
  • forearm dressing is changed at 9–​10 days and at weekly intervals
    thereafter. If heals uneventfully dress forearm for about 4–​5 weeks;
  • function of the hand following harvest is usually normal unless
    complicated by skin graft loss or fractured radius (composite flap)
    (Fig. 2.13).
96



     96    Chapter 2      Oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer




          Fig. 2.2 Oropharyngeal reconstruction with radial forearm free flap.




          Fig. 2.3 Fracture of residual radius following composite harvest.

          • Complications (donor site):
            • bleeding (rare);
            • excess exudate can soak dressing and will require changing;
            • wound infection or skin graft loss with tendon exposure can occur;
              exposed tendon usually heals after lengthy regular dressings;
            • paraesthesia at root of thumb is common;
            • power and range of movements in hand not usually impaired;
            • scarring problematic in younger patients—​camouflage can be offered.
                                                      Reconstruction             97


Anterolateral thigh flap
• Indications and strengths:
  • as per radial forearm soft tissue flap;
  • larger area can be harvested;
  • donor site morbidity is very low.
• Anatomy and procedure:
  • a fasciocutaneous flap based on the septocutaneous or
    musculocutaneous perforators of the descending branch of the lateral
    circumflex femoral artery. A satisfactory perforator is generally found
    within 3cm of the midpoint of a line connecting the anterior superior
    iliac spine with the superolateral border of the patella. More than half
    of perforators traverse the substance of the vastus lateralis muscle.
    The descending branch of the lateral circumflex femoral artery, and
    its vena comitans, lies between the vastus lateralis and rectus femoris
    muscles, along with the nerve to the vastus lateralis. The descending
    branch can usually be safely dissected proximally to its major branch
    to the rectus femoris, which should be preserved during flap harvest;
  • skin paddles can be 20cm in length;
  • vascular pedicle can be up to 20cm;
  • primary closure is possible for paddles 8–​9 cm in width;
  • in most cases, the fascia lata represents the deep aspect of the
    harvested flap, but suprafascial harvest is possible. Portions of vastus
    lateralis muscle can be harvested with the flap if necessary;
  • the position of the nerve to vastus lateralis is variable with respect to
    the vascular pedicle, and the nerve cannot always be left intact during
    harvest. It is likely that nerve division will result in morbidity.
Fibula flap
Up to 25cm of fibula bone ± skin paddle on lateral leg can be harvested
based on the peroneal artery and veins. The bone is osteotomized to match
the mandible or maxillary alveolus. The skin paddle provides a good soft
tissue reconstruction with the bone readily accepting implants, but does
not match the height of a dentate mandible. Provided 6cm of bone is pre-
served at both ends of the donor site, there is no significant impact on joint
function or weight bearing. The donor site skin is closed primarily or with a
split-​thickness skin graft for larger defects.
• Modifications:
   • bone and muscle cuff only;
   • lateral sural cutaneous nerve can be included to provide for
      sensate flap;
   • bone can be ‘double barrelled’ at the recipient site to increase the
      height of the neo-​alveolus (Fig. 2.14).
• Preoperative assessment:
   • exclude previous trauma, surgery, or peripheral vascular disease;
   • mandatory investigation to ensure all three vessels in leg are patent
      and healthy (DUSS, conventional angiograms, or MRA are common
      options).
• Positioning: supine position with the leg partly flexed and internally
   rotated to allow access to dissect the posterior part of skin paddle.
98



     98    Chapter 2       Oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer




          Fig. 2.4 Postoperative view of double-​barrelled fibula flap.

          • Preparation:
            • leg is prepped and landmarks marked (line from fibula head to lateral
              epicondyle of ankle inferiorly);
            • skin paddle is fusiform in shape, and includes the junction of the
              upper two-​thirds and the lower third of the above line to capture
              a dominant septocutaneous or musculocutaneous perforators to
              the skin;
            • tourniquet is inflated to twice the systolic BP.
          • Procedure (Fig. 2.15):
            • skin paddle is incised anteriorly through skin and subcutaneous tissue
              to the peroneus muscles;
            • dissection is continued backwards in a subfascial plane towards the
              intermuscular septum;




          Fig. 2.5 Intraoperative view of right fibular harvest.
                                                      Reconstruction             99

  • peroneus longus and brevis are dissected anteriorly off the fibula in a
    supraperiosteal plane;
  • when the anterior aspect of the fibula is reached, care is taken to
    keep close to bone to avoid injuring the anterior tibial vessels and
    deep peroneal nerve in the anterior compartment;
  • extensor hallucis longus is dissected off the fibula to expose the
    interosseous membrane;
  • after osteotomies of the distal and proximal ends of the fibula with
    saws (at least 6cm length preserved both ends to maintain integrity of
    joints) with protection of the tissue deep to bone, the distal ends of
    the peroneal vessels are identified, ligated, and transected;
  • interosseous membrane is then divided after external rotation of the
    osteotomized fibula for easier access;
  • chevron-​orientated muscle fibres of the tibialis posterior are
    visualized to identify the fascial plane superficial to the peroneal
    vessels. Dissection along this plane enables continuous visualization of
    the peroneal vessels. The entire length is dissected to the bifurcation
    of the posterior tibial vessels;
  • posterior aspect of the skin paddle is dissected including a muscle cuff
    of flexor hallucis longus and soleus to preserve the musculocutaneous
    perforators to the skin paddle. The flexor hallucis longus is transected
    before the pedicle is freed;
  • tourniquet is deflated and haemostasis achieved. The fibula composite
    flap is hinged on the pedicle ready for transfer.
• Closure:
  • primary closure possible with small fusiform skin paddle design;
  • larger defects need split-​thickness skin grafting;
  • a drain is employed as can be a catheter for long-​acting LA infusion.
• Postoperative care:
  • elevate foot with pillow;
  • viability of the foot must be checked regularly;
  • leg dressing is changed at 10 days;
  • patient is gradually mobilized with physiotherapy input and
    walking aids.
• Complications:
  • muscular pain;
  • oedema;
  • paraesthesia—​anterior and lateral side of leg and dorsum of foot;
  • weakness of dorsiflexion of the great toe;
  • ischaemia to foot.

Deep circumflex iliac artery flap
This is another common hard tissue flap used for oropharyngeal bony de-
fects reconstruction. Bone from the anterior iliac crest ± internal oblique
muscle (or thicker skin adjacent to bone) is harvested based on the deep
circumflex iliac artery (DCIA) and veins. The pedicle is relatively short. The
donor site muscle defect may need a mesh closure. Any skin defect is closed
primarily.
• Preoperative assessment: clinical exclusion of previous abdominal
   injury/​surgery.
01



     100    Chapter 2     Oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer

           • Positioning:
             • supine position;
             • a sandbag can be used to improve access to a more posterior part of
               the iliac crest to achieve a longer pedicle.
           • Preparation:
             • exposure from lower chest wall down to groin;
             • include midline medially.
           • Procedure (DCIA and internal oblique muscle flap):
             • skin incision runs obliquely from the pubic crest 2cm medial to the
               iliac crest in a superolateral direction to just below the costal margin;
             • dissection continues on a wide front down to the external oblique
               muscle which is then incised to expose the internal oblique muscle
               (fibres run in different plane);
             • internal oblique muscle is initially divided at its cephalad extent, the
               plane between the internal oblique, and transversus being revealed by
               a white fascial flash;
             • internal oblique muscle is dissected from cephalad to caudal leaving it
               hinged on the iliac crest;
             • ascending branch of the DCIA (and vein) runs on the deep surface
               of the internal oblique muscle and is used to identify the main DCIA
               pedicle;
             • DCIA is traced to the external iliac vessels;
             • lateral portion of the transversus abdominus is then transected about
               2cm from the inner table of the iliac crest;
             • DCIA runs between the iliacus and transversus abdominus along the
               inner table of the iliac crest and the iliacus is transected (with 2cm
               cuff ) to expose the inner table of iliac crest (Fig. 2.16);
             • lateral dissection is carried out next lifting the muscles of the lateral
               aspect of iliac crest;
             • pedicle is protected and a segment of iliac crest osteotomized
               according to the desired shape, and the anterior superior iliac spine is
               preserved with the inguinal ligament attachment;
             • the harvested flap is then ready for transfer (Fig. 2.17) and insertion
               (Fig. 2.18).
           • Closure:
             • meticulous closure is necessary to prevent hernia formation;
             • transversus muscle is approximated to iliacus. If a significant part
               of internal oblique muscle has been removed, a mesh is used to
               repair the ensuing defect. The external oblique aponeurosis is then
               approximated to the tensor fascia lata and gluteus medius;
             • in addition to a drain, an infusion catheter is placed in the wound to
               permit the use of long-​acting LAs to supplement pain control;
             • remaining subcutaneous tissues and skin are closed conventionally.
           • Postoperative care:
             • listen for bowel sounds to ensure no ileus;
             • patient is gradually mobilized from day 2–​3. Physiotherapy input with
               walking aids is required.
           • Complications:
             • muscular pain;
             • weakening and bulging of abdominal wall;
                                                          Reconstruction        101




Fig. 2.6 Medial bone cut during DCIA harvest.




Fig. 2.7 DCIA harvest completed prior to division of pedicle.

  •  hernia formation;
  •  femoral nerve injury;
  •  damage to intraperitoneal contents;
  •  paraesthesia—​lateral aspect of thigh.
There are many other flaps that include the anterolateral thigh, latissimus
dorsi, lateral arm, scapula, and rectus abdominus. (For detailed descriptions
please see % Further reading, p. 141.)
Four less common free flaps
• Rectus abdominus.
•	Latissimus dorsi.
• Scapular and parascapular.
•	Medial sural artery perforator (MSAP).
021



      102    Chapter 2      Oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer




            Fig. 2.8 Mandibular reconstruction with DCIA (postoperative image of Fig. 2.7,
            p. 71).

            Reconstructive options and common defects
            A common strategy is to use two-​team operating, one to perform the ab-
            lation and the other reconstruction. Harvesting of a free flap should be car-
            ried out simultaneously, if at all possible, to reduce overall operating time.
            Defects
            • Tongue and floor of mouth:
              • small defects may be left to re-​epithelialized (laser) or closed primarily
                 or with a local flap (e.g. nasolabial flap);
              • medium size defects require a pliable flap to allow residual tissue
                 function (e.g. radial forearm flap, anterolateral thigh flap);
              • large defects with little remaining organ/​tissue will require bulkier flaps,
                 such as pectoralis major, latissimus dorsi, or rectus abdominus flaps.
            • Buccal:
              • superficial tumours can be removed with a laser or skin grafted;
              • small defects can be closed with local flaps;
              • larger defects can be reconstructed with radial forearm flaps;
              • through and through defects will require a bi-​paddled radial forearm
                 flap or larger soft tissue flap such as the anterolateral thigh.
            • Mandible: where mandibular invasion necessitates a segmental resection
              (full-​thickness mandible producing discontinuity), vascularized bone is
              preferable due to the high rate of postoperative radiotherapy. Common
              flaps used include fibula, DCIA or scapular.
            • Maxilla: a low-​level defect can be obturated with excellent oronasal seal,
              function, and cosmesis. Larger or more complex defects require free
              tissue transfer options such as fibula, scapula, or DCIA flaps.
            • Lip: this is a difficult area when the defect is too big for primary closure
              or local flaps. Free tissue transfer is often suboptimal in terms of colour
              match, oral seal, and function, even though tendon modification can be
              incorporated.
            • Pharynx: partial defects can be reconstructed with a pectoralis major
              flap or soft tissue flap, such as radial forearm flap. Alternatives include
              anterolateral thigh or jejunal flaps. The anterolateral thigh can be tubed
              for full circumferential defects.
                                                       Reconstruction             103


Developments
Recent and ongoing developments include modification to the planned flap
site (e.g. tissue expansion), tissue engineering (i.e. prelamination or pre-
fabrication of flaps), and transplantation. These techniques currently have
limited roles in cancer patients as they require time for the modification.
Immunosuppression is also best avoided with cancer patients.
   Technology advances in medical modelling with 3D printers now enable
surgeons to prefabricate accurate reconstruction plates for difficult com-
posite defects (e.g. large tumours or pathological fractures) and produce
templates to achieve optimal bony osteotomies. Operating times will also
be shortened. Perforator flaps may reduce donor site morbidity and im-
prove reconstructive options for the defect.
Implants
This is a useful adjunct for reconstructed bony defects involving tooth-​
bearing segments. Retention of prostheses can be improved with the aid
of implant placement. Chewing, and consequently QOL, has been demon-
strated to be significantly improved. Bone flaps suitable for implant insertion
are favoured with this rehabilitation in mind during treatment planning.
Prosthetic rehabilitation
This well-​established technique for small maxillary defects requires pre-
operative planning with a maxillofacial technician. When chosen for the ap-
propriate defect it provides an effective and well-​accepted reconstructive
option. An impression of the jaw is taken before surgery to make a dressing
plate. The maxillary defect after resection is dressed with a suitable ob-
turation material and plate to seal the oral cavity from the nasal and antral
cavities. The raw inner surfaces are skin grafted to facilitate prompt healing.
A dressing change is performed 2 weeks later to allow further accurate
impressions or the fitting of a temporary hollow obturator. A more per-
manent obturator with teeth is fitted later. More complex defects can be
filled with a multipieced prostheses or further retention gained with the aid
of implants.
041



      104    Chapter 2     Oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer


            Surgical complications
            A surgical complication is a development that is generally to the patient’s
            detriment arising at the time of the operation or within the postoperative
            period. Overall, complication rates as high as 60% have been reported in
            some surgical series treating oral cancer.
            Risk factors in oral cancer patients
            The factors influencing complications are often multifactorial. They include:
            Patient factors
            • Age: usually older patients.
            • Poor performance status.
            •	Medical co-​morbidities, e.g. ischaemic heart disease, respiratory disease.
            • Excess alcohol and smoking.
            • Poor nutritional status.
            Tumour factors
            • Advanced stage tumours are a common presentation.
            • Aggressive tumours.
            Treatment factors
            • Complex surgery, i.e. lengthy operation.
            • Need for reconstruction.
            • Previous surgical treatment.
            • Previous treatment modalities, e.g. radiotherapy.
            Consequence of complications
            • Major complications (~20%):
              • can be life-​threatening (up to 4% mortality reported);
              • increase length of stay;
              • cause further suffering with adverse effect on QOL;
              • require further treatment;
              • incur i cost;
              • delay adjuvant treatment;
              • all may result in poorer outcomes.
            • Minor complications: may not be life-​threatening, but can require further
              surgery or prolong inpatient stay. Nevertheless, they adversely affect
              patients and may contribute towards the development of major problems.
            Prevention
            Predisposing factors should be identified as part of pre-​assessment and
            appropriate interventions used to optimize the patient’s status. The quan-
            tification of risk is also useful for formulating treatment plans, consent,
            and rehabilitation. With effective pre-​assessment and optimization of any
            pre-​existing conditions, careful surgery with advanced intraoperative moni-
            toring and vigilant postoperative care, complications can be prevented or at
            least kept to a minimum.
            Complications associated with oral cancer treatment
            General anaesthetic and positioning complications
            • Nerve compression injury, e.g. ulnar.
            • Soft tissue problems, e.g. precipitation of pressure sores.
                                             Surgical complications             105


General medical problems or arising from existing co-​morbidities
• Pulmonary (atelectasis, pneumonia, acute respiratory distress syndrome
   (ARDS), respiratory failure).
• Cardiovascular (myocardial infarction (MI), tachyarrhythmias, heart
   failure).
• Neurological (cardiovascular accident, delirium).
• Deep vein thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolism.
•	Urinary tract infection.
• Renal failure.
• Alcohol withdrawal.
(See main surgical textbooks for specific diagnosis and management.)
   The diagnosis and management of these conditions are dealt with in the
conventional manner. Of these potential complications, respiratory (up to
20%) and cardiovascular (~10%) make up a significant proportion of med-
ical problems encountered following head and neck cancer surgery. Wound
infections are next most common.
Specific surgical problems
Perioperative complications
• Carotid sinus sensitivity: manipulation of or pressure on the carotid
  bulb (baroreceptors) during surgery may cause asystole/​marked
  bradycardia and hypotension. Avoiding further pressure or, if continued
  manipulation is required due to tumour dissection, topical or injected
  lidocaine may be beneficial. Postoperative sensitivity may be due to
  scarring around the bulb.
• i intracranial pressure (ICP): ligation of the IJV will cause a transient
  rise in ICP. This seldom causes overt symptoms, but may contribute to
  postoperative delirium or facial oedema and cyanosis. Simultaneous
  bilateral IJV ligations (rare nowadays) will give rise to spectacular acute
  facial swelling.
Immediate/​early complications
Bleeding
Any bleeding immediately after oral cancer surgery usually declares itself
quickly and is detected before vital signs deteriorate. Basic principles of
controlling bleeding include:
• Application of pressure.
• Summoning of assistance.
• Resuscitation.
•	Urgent return to theatre to identify and treat the cause and protection
   of airway (crucial).
Many major oral cancer ablation and reconstruction patients may have tem-
porary tracheostomies. The cuffed tube will secure the airway and enable
rapid return to theatre safely. Sources of bleeding include major vessels
and their branches (usually slippage of ligation), suture lines, or from the
undersurface of flaps (may be due to coagulated vessels reopening during
hypertensive episodes). Any haematoma must be dealt with promptly as
it can threaten free tissue transfer anastomoses, compress the airway, and
subsequently promote infection.
061



      106    Chapter 2      Oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer

            Airway obstruction and tracheostomy problems
            Surgery for oropharyngeal cancer has a significant risk of obstructing the
            airway through bleeding, soft tissue oedema, and haematoma in the neck.
            • Where the airway is felt to be at risk, an elective temporary
               tracheostomy should be carried out. An emergency reintubation for a
               compromised airway postoperatively is best avoided.
            • A patient with an in-​dwelling tracheostomy tube can still be at risk of
               airway obstruction through a displaced or blocked tube.
            • Prevent blockage with meticulous nursing care, regular clearing of
               secretions, humidification, inner tube hygiene, and appropriate tube change.
            • Pressure of the inflatable cuff must not be excessive.
            • Breathing exercises should be encouraged and the tube adequately secured.
            • Decannulation should be attempted when the airway is no longer
               compromised (maintain self-​ventilation), minimal suction is required for
               secretions, and the patient able to protect his or her airway through
               effective coughing.
            Chylous leakage
            ~2% risk in NDs. Caused by damage to thoracic duct (left side) or lymphatic
            duct (right side). Diagnosed during surgery by the presence, pooling, or dis-
            charge of clear fluid. Promptly diagnose, and treat by ligating or over-​sewing
            the affected vessels. Bipolar diathermy is not effective. If undetected at sur-
            gery a chylous leak will declare itself as a collection in the neck or excess
            fluid in drain. The fluid will be clear (if patient starved) or milky (if feeding
            due to fat content—​biochemistry reveals high triglycerides). Management
            depends on volume of output:
            • High chylous output (>600mL/​24h) will need surgical exploration with
               ligation of affected vessel/​tissue. Can affect the patient’s fluid balance,
               deplete protein levels, produce immunocompromise, and prevent the
               neck from healing. Over-​sewing, application of tissue glue, and pressure
               dressings are methods adopted to control the leakage.
            •	Low chylous output can be treated non-​surgically with medium-​chain
               triglyceride enteral feeding, supraclavicular pressure dressings, and
               careful attention to the fluid and electrolyte balance. If persistent, total
               parenteral feeding may be necessary.
            Seroma and salivary collection
            • A collection of fluid may form soon after the removal of, or due to
              blockage of, neck drains. It can result in separation of the skin flap from
              the underlying tissue bed and is usually gravity dependent at the base of
              the neck.
            • The tail of the parotid may have been transected during ND resulting in
              a salivary collection.
            • The swelling is softer and more fluctuant than a haematoma.
            •	Usually managed by repeated aspiration to allow healing—​safeguard the
              anastomoses where present and prevent infection.
            • A sialocoele can be confirmed with high amylase content on analysis.
              Exclude an orocervical communication. If a sialocoele reforms regularly,
              antisialagogues may be required.
                                            Surgical complications            107


Infection
Wound infections following oral cancer surgery (oral cavity—​clean con-
taminated surgery category) is not uncommon. The incidence of wound
infection is ~20% in most series. It is often multifactorial. The causative
pathogens are often polymicrobial, with well-​known pathogens including
anaerobes. Risk factors for infection:
• Advanced disease.
• Existing co-​morbidities.
•	Longer duration of surgery.
• Previous treatment (chemotherapy and radiotherapy).
• Smoking.
• Excess alcohol intake.
• Presence of tracheostomy tube.
•	Use of blood transfusions, often multifactorial. The causative pathogens
   are often polymicrobial, with well-​known pathogens including anaerobes.
• Antibiotic prophylaxis for clean contaminated surgery is warranted and
   should be broad spectrum, covering common pathogens and anaerobes.
   Shorter courses of antibiotics/​perioperative prophylaxis have been
   shown to have similar infection rates to longer courses (see % General
   surgical principles, p. 398).
•	Management of wound infection: drainage of pus, debridement,
   systemic antibiotics for systemic/​severe local signs, with best-​guess
   antibiotics followed by adjustment after microbiology results.
Dehiscence/​failure of wound healing/​fistula
•	Minor dehiscence or wound breakdown is not uncommon, and often
  has little impact on outcome.
• Ideally, prevention with meticulous techniques, antibiotic prophylaxis,
  and good nutritional support is best.
• Oral dehiscence is often associated with salivary collection/​leakage
  through the neck, requiring nil by mouth + enteral feeding approach.
• There is a risk of neck vessels becoming exposed with a danger of
  major secondary bleeding.
•	Larger wounds can be managed with the over-​sewing of packing.
•	More significant defects will need further surgery to cover and seal the
  oral cavity.
Nerve injuries
• Phrenic nerve injury: raised (ipsilateral) diaphragm may lead to impaired
  pulmonary function with i risk of infection.
• Sympathetic chain injury: Horner’s syndrome.
• Accessory/​cervical plexus injury (see ‘Shoulder and neck problems’ in
  % Late complications, p. 108).
•	Marginal mandibular branch of facial nerve: weak lower lip (transient or
  permanent), usually of cosmetic, rather than functional impact.
• Superior laryngeal nerve injury: weaker voice. Not a common problem
  declared by patients following ND.
• Paraesthesia of neck skin, resection bed and periauricular region
  (associated cutaneous nerves from ND or direct nerve resection during
  tumour ablation).
081



      108    Chapter 2      Oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer

            Flap failure
            All flaps should be monitored frequently in the immediate postoperative
            phase so that circulatory problems can be detected early with a view to
            successful salvage:
            •	Local flaps in the head and neck are usually robust due to the profuse
               vascular supply.
            • Pedicled flaps such as the pectoralis major myocutaneous flap may
               become compromised due to constriction of the pedicle as it is
               reflected over the clavicle or beneath a tight skin tunnel in the neck. The
               constriction may be exacerbated by postoperative oedema. Judicious
               removal of sutures may be enough to reverse the problem.
            • Free flaps demand close monitoring for the first 48h when problems
               such as venous engorgement (flap becomes blue and mottled) or arterial
               occlusion (pale, white flap) are most likely to occur. The latter can be
               difficult to diagnose, but a reduced or absent pulse can be detected
               by hand-​held Doppler probe. Flap-​monitoring devices may provide
               earlier warning for successful salvage. Examples include implantable
               Doppler probes and microdialysis. In addition to anastomotic problems,
               external compression (neck haematoma) or systemic disturbance (e.g.
               hypotension, arrhythmias) may also threaten the flap.
            •	Management of flap compromise includes resuscitation if required
               followed by urgent exploration to identify the cause of the circulatory
               insufficiency. Where surgical interventions have been exhausted or
               are not feasible (local flap), venous engorgement may be relieved with
               leeches, while waiting for collateral circulation to be established (7–​
               10 days). In such circumstances, antibiotic prophylaxis is required with
               attention to haemoglobin levels/​fluid and electrolyte balance.
            Donor site morbidity
            See % Reconstruction, p. 90.
            Late complications
            • Recurrence:
              • can be local, regional (neck, including contralateral side), or distant
                 (usually lung);
              • risk of recurrence depends on tumour margins, stage of the disease,
                 tumour behaviour, and treatment modality employed; the risk is
                 highest for large tumours;
              • in general, salvage rates are poor, in particular for high-​staged
                 tumours and previous combined modality treatment.
            • Altered sensation: in addition to being unpleasant (cold draught,
              shaving) swallowing can be affected (no oropharyngeal sensory
              feedback). Most patients adjust to numbness of the skin.
            • Shoulder and neck problems:
              • incidence—​up to 80% in radical NDs and 50% in selective NDs;
              • neck may ache and there is limitation in range of movements;
              • shoulder may be painful (at rest and in motion) with limitation of
                 abduction and flexion;
              • patient may have problems with raising the shoulder and so may be
                 unable to carry out activities of daily living (e.g. combing hair, putting
                 on clothes);
                                                Surgical complications               109

    •  shoulder is affected by RND, modified RND, and SND in descending
       order of proportion, as well as severity (QOL measurements);
    • SAN and cervical plexus may be damaged during surgery (or
       sacrificed in RND), and adhesive capsulitis of the shoulder joint may
       be a contributory factor;
    • affected shoulder will have an atrophied trapezius muscles,
       the shoulder girdle will take up an inferior position compared
       to the contralateral side and there may be hypertrophy of the
       sternoclavicular joint (shoulder syndrome);
    • management is mainly preventative with careful surgery to preserve
       the nerves and relevant plexus; progressive resistance exercise
       training have been shown to reduce shoulder pain and disability;
    • chronic shoulder pain can be debilitating—​consider referral to chronic
       pain specialist to review medications/​pain control measures and
       consideration of nerve/​ganglion blocks.
•   Hypertrophic scars: lip split incisions and neck scars are designed to
    heal well. Most oral cancer patients tend to not worry about their
    scars (although with decreasing age incidence this may not always be
    the case). Occasionally, a scar may become hypertrophied particularly
    with infection or in young patients. Topical silicone gel may help and
    camouflage referrals should be considered.
•   Lymphoedema:
    • neck and face may be swollen in the early postoperative phase, but
       tends to settle with time;
    • oedema can affect the face and eyes—​tends to be worse in the
       morning and lessens over the day with gravity-​aided drainage;
    • manual lymphatic massage may be useful.
•   Fatigue:
    • common following major surgery (forewarn patient);
    • eliminate organic causes, e.g. anaemia, hypothyroidism;
    • develop a rehabilitation programme where gradual goals are set to
       build up patients’ confidence and improve their exercise tolerance.
•   Depression: the diagnosis and subsequent treatment of cancer is a
    major life event. Support from family and close friends will help. The
    clinical nurse specialist’s input is vital in this area. In some cases medical
    treatment may be necessary (see % Psychosocial aspects, p. 130).
Combined treatment modalities
Usually necessary to improve control of advanced disease and where sur-
gical treatment alone is insufficient (close/​positive margins, neck disease,
aggressive tumour parameters). Side effects and complication rates will be
predictably higher.
Prediction of complications
Identifying those at higher risk of complications, optimizing their pre-​
existing medical co-​morbidities, meticulous surgery, followed by vigilance at
an early stage in the post-​treatment pathway should reduce the incidence
of complications. The use of objective measurements such as ACE-​27, ASA
may also be beneficial.
10



     110    Chapter 2      Oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer


           Other head and neck cancers
           Maxillary sinus tumours
           Epidemiology
           • <1% of all tumours.
           • 3% of head and neck malignancies.
           • ♂ > ♀.
           •	Most prevalent in fifth decade.
           • Commonly presents late (T3/​4 disease).
           Risk factors
           • Tobacco.
           • Alcohol.
           • Occupation, e.g. hard wood dust, nickel, benzene.
           • Ionizing radiation.
           • Oncocytic papilloma.
           • HPV.
           Classification
           Based on site or pathology.
           Pathology
           • Benign:
             • osteoma;
             • fibroma.
           • Malignant:
             • epithelial—​SCC, adenocarcinoma (more common in occupational
               disease), adenoid cystic carcinoma, small cell carcinoma, malignant
               melanoma;
             • osseous—​osteogenic sarcoma, Ewing’s sarcoma;
             • connective tissue—​chondrosarcoma, fibrosarcoma.

           Presentation
           • Nasal symptoms:
             • epistaxis;
             • rhinorrhoea;
             • obstruction.
           • Oral symptoms:
             • pain;
             • palatal swelling or sensory change (nasoplatine and greater palatine nerves);
             • tooth mobility;
             • ulceration;
             • trismus.
           • Eye symptoms:
             • epiphora;
             • diplopia;
             • proptosis;
             • d acuity.
           • Cutaneous symptoms:
             • swelling;
             • sensory change (distribution of infraorbital nerve);
             • fixation;
             • erythema.
                                   Other head and neck cancers        111


Investigations
• OPG.
• CT (posterior wall/​pterygoid involvement).
•	MRI (more sensitive for orbital soft tissue involvement).
Presentation
• T1: tumour confined to sinus mucosa.
• T2: tumour invading bone but not posterior wall.
• T3: tumour invading:
  • posterior wall;
  • pterygoid plates;
  • subcutaneous tissues;
  • orbital floor;
  • infratemporal fossa;
  • ethmoid sinus.
• T4: tumour invading:
  • orbital contents beyond floor;
  • nasopharynx;
  • dura.

Management
• Surgery followed by radiotherapy if resectable.
• Consider orbital exenteration (if ocular involvement or post-​
  radiotherapy ocular morbidity predicted to be high).
• Reconstructive options:
  • obturation;
  • free tissue transfer;
  • implant-​retained ocular prosthesis.

Prognosis
•	Local recurrence around 45% (mostly in first year).
• At presentation:
  • 20% nodal disease;
  • 20% distant metastasis.
• 40% 5-​year survival.
Nasal cavity tumours
Clinical features
• Epistaxis.
• Congestion.
• Obstruction.
• Swelling.
• Rhinorrhoea.
Differential diagnosis
• Benign nasal polyps.
• Rhinitis.
Treatment
• Surgery ± radiotherapy.
• Radiotherapy alone if there are cosmetic concerns.
• Prognosis.
• 15% of patients develop second primary—​40% in head and neck, 60%
  subcapital.
12



     112    Chapter 2     Oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer


           Radiotherapy
           • Normally administered as external beam radiotherapy for
             oropharyngeal tumours in the UK.
           • In parts of Europe, interstitial radiotherapy (brachytherapy) is more
             commonly employed:
             • insertion of iridium wires into the tumour in order to deliver a highly
                targeted dose of radiotherapy while minimizing dose to adjacent
                normal tissues;
             • in UK practice this technique is usually reserved for those patients
                who have received a full previous dose of external beam radiotherapy
                and where all other options have been exhausted.
           • Radiotherapy may be used as the primary modality to treat either the
             primary site, or the neck, or both. The fields covered and the dose
             delivered depend upon a complex number of factors, which involve
             careful planning and calculation. It is also important to decide whether
             treatment is being given with curative intent (radical) or in order to
             minimize or prevent symptoms (palliative).
           • Ideally, planning is undertaken on a CT scan that is performed with the
             patient in the treatment position.
           • A rigid facemask (constructed from moulds) is used to ensure that
             the head is always placed in exactly the same position in order that
             treatment is delivered accurately to the prescribed fields.
           • Conventional external beam radiotherapy using mega-​voltage photons
             from a linear accelerator is administered in 2G fractions over each
             weekday until the prescribed dose is achieved.
           • There is some evidence to suggest that hyper-​fractionating the dose to
             give 3 fractions per day, rather than 1, and accelerating the time over
             which the total dose is delivered from 6 weeks to 12 days is beneficial.
           • Intensity-​modulated radiotherapy utilizes enhanced computerized
             technology to improve the precision of delivering the radiation dose to
             the tumour and decreases the dosage to surrounding normal tissues—​
             of particular benefit when delivering radiotherapy to the complex area
             of the head and neck (Fig. 2.19).
           • Electrons are occasionally used to treat superficial skin metastases or
             small lip tumours where minimal tissue penetration is required.
           Primary treatment
           • As a general rule, most sites in the oral cavity and oropharynx are best
             managed with primary surgery, with or without adjuvant radiotherapy.
           • For small tumours of the soft palate, tongue base, and tonsil, where the
             morbidity of the surgery is significant and the cure rates of radiotherapy
             are high, radiotherapy may be indicated.
           • Where there is evidence of close proximity of the tumour to bone,
             radiotherapy is contraindicated as it is relatively ineffective and can give
             rise to osteoradionecrosis.
           • Adenocarcinomas of salivary gland origin are relatively radio-​insensitive
             and should be managed with primary surgery.
           • Radiotherapy may also be indicated outside these criteria when the
             patient’s physical status contraindicates surgery or where the patient will
             not consent to surgery.
                                                       Radiotherapy          113




Fig. 2.9 Intensity-​modulated radiotherapy plan.

• In the clinically N0 neck, elective radiotherapy may be indicated to the
  neck where the primary site has a high incidence of occult metastasis,
  e.g. tongue and floor of mouth.
• Where high-​risk primary tumours cross the midline, consideration
  should be given to treating bilateral neck fields.
• Where there is clinical evidence of neck node metastasis, small volume
  disease without evidence of tumour necrosis may be managed by
  radiotherapy. However, for large volume disease or where there
  is tumour necrosis, a ND should be performed prior to adjuvant
  radiotherapy.
• Where the primary site might be best managed by radiotherapy due to
  the morbidity of primary surgery, but where there is bulky neck disease,
  it is often best to undertake a ND followed by primary radiotherapy to
  the primary tumour and adjuvant radiotherapy to the neck.
Adjuvant treatment
• Radiotherapy, in combination with surgery, has been demonstrated to
  deliver the best chance of cure for most oral cavity and oropharyngeal
  sites of advanced stage disease. When used in combination with surgery
  complications are minimized if surgery precedes radiotherapy.
• Indications for adjuvant radiotherapy following surgery include:
  • close (<5mm) or involved margins at the primary site and where
     further excision is impracticable;
  • perineural or perivascular spread;
  • large tumours;
  • poorly differentiated tumours;
  • >1 lymph node involved;
  • extracapsular spread in a lymph node.
14



     114    Chapter 2      Oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer

           Complications and side effects of radiotherapy
           Acute effects
           •	Mucositis.
           • Skin erythema or ulceration (Fig. 2.20).
           •	Loss of taste.
           • Impaired nutrition and weight loss.
           • Bleeding.
           • Infection.
           •	Lymphoedema.
           Late complications
           • Fistula.
           • Impaired healing.
           • Osteoradionecrosis.
           • Impaired swallowing.
           • Impaired speech.
           • Impaired taste.
           • Xerostomia and radiation caries.
           • Susceptibility to dental caries and periodontal disease.
           •	Loss of hair.
           • Skin atrophy, telangiectasia, and colour changes (e.g.
              hypopigmentation).
           • Radiation-​induced tumours.




           Fig. 2.20 Acute skin reaction during radiotherapy.
                                                         Radiotherapy           115


• Neuropathies.
•	Lens cataracts.
• Hypothyroidism, e.g. bilateral NDs and adjuvant radiotherapy.
• Fibrosis.
Supportive care during radiotherapy
Nutritional support
Throughout the period of treatment many patients require nutritional
support. While at one end of the scale some patients will simply require
careful dietary advice and possibly oral supplementation, others will require
prolonged supplemental feeding with nasogastric tubes (NGTs) or feeding
gastrostomies.
Mouth care
During active treatment and beyond, many patients have difficulty
maintaining an adequate level of oral hygiene. Specialist hygienists should
be available to provide dental hygiene instruction, support patients with
fluoride treatments, and provide devices where manual dexterity is poor.
A restorative dentist may be required to give expert advice regarding
complex dental restorations or support the general dental practitioner in
providing appropriate ongoing dental care. Those patients who have under-
gone radiotherapy require special attention as they are at high risk from
dental caries and periodontal disease. If such problems can be minimized
and anticipated, then the incidence of osteoradionecrosis will be reduced.
16



     116    Chapter 2     Oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer


           Systemic anticancer therapies
           Chemotherapy
           The role of chemotherapy in oropharyngeal malignancy remains contro-
           versial. Most regimens rely on a combination of platinum-​based drugs,
           fluorouracil, methotrexate, or the newer taxanes, and in some cases mono-
           clonal antibody therapies, such as cetuximab (epidermal growth factor re-
           ceptor inhibitor). There is no evidence that any existing regimens are as
           effective as a standalone curative treatment.
              The timing of administration of chemotherapy can be:
           • Neoadjuvant/​induction: given prior to radiotherapy or surgery with the
              intention of improving organ preservation. Little evidence for this and
              no evidence of survival advantage.
           • Concurrent: administered during the radiotherapy treatment schedule.
              When used as a primary modality treatment for tonsil, tongue base, and
              nasopharynx, appears to offer an 8% survival advantage. Complication
              rates are high with many patients suffering severe toxicity reactions.
           • Adjuvant: given after radiotherapy or surgery. Survival benefit when
              used as an adjuvant to surgery is less certain, but when given with
              radiotherapy as a postoperative adjunct toxicity rates are very
              high. Good evidence of benefit in cases with involved margins or
              extracapsular spread in positive lymph nodes after ND. Chemotherapy
              alone should only be used in the context of clinical trials.
           Complications of chemotherapy
           Acute effects
           • Severe mucositis.
           • Nausea and vomiting.
           • Impaired nutrition.
           • Weight loss.
           • Diarrhoea.
           • Soft tissue necrosis.
           • Bleeding.
           • Hair loss.
           • Neurotoxicity.
           • Immunosuppression.
           • Septicaemia.
           • Neutropenia.
           • Thrombocytopenia.
           •	Multiorgan failure.
           • Neutropenic sepsis is a medical emergency, which requires rapid
             assessment, and the administration of appropriate IV antibiotics within
             1h of presentation. Appropriate protocols must be in place so that
             these patients receive prompt care wherever they present, which is
             often not to the oncology treatment centre.
                                     Systemic anticancer therapies                 117


Late complications
• Nephropathy.
• Cardiomyopathy.
• Pulmonary fibrosis.
• Ototoxicity.
• Peripheral neuropathy.
Gene therapy
Clinical trials investigating the value of genetically modified viruses that se-
lectively infect and kill tumour cells are presently being undertaken, but at
this stage it is too early to anticipate whether this technology may be of
benefit in the management of head and neck cancers.
Immunotherapy
Nivolumab (an anti PD-​1 monoclonal antibody) has shown a survival benefit
compared to docetaxel in the treatment of advanced head and neck SCC.
The treatment is more effective in HPV-​positive tumours.
18



     118    Chapter 2     Oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer


           Prevention
           Reduction in population tobacco usage is likely to reduce the incidence of
           new cases of oral cavity and oropharynx cancers. Recent measures, such as
           banning tobacco smoking in public places, are beginning to show reductions
           in smoking rates in the population. However, the inherent lead time of car-
           cinogenesis means that these effects will take many years to manifest. This
           disease can also be prevented by modification of alcohol consumption. One
           intriguing new area is vaccination against HPV-​16. From September 2019,
           all 12-​and 13-​year-​olds in school Year 8 were offered the HPV vaccine by
           the NHS (M https://​www.nhs.uk/​conditions/​vaccinations/​hpv-​human-​
           papillomavirus-​vaccine/​).
Prevention   119
201



      120    Chapter 2     Oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer


            Nutritional support
            It is well documented that malnourished patients perform less well following
            surgery than their nourished counterparts. They take longer to recover and
            suffer more complications. >25% of hospital patients are malnourished due
            to a variety of reasons. Identification of such patients is not always easy.
            Prevention of malnourishment is paramount.
            Caloric needs
            Most patients require 2000–​2500kCal (20–​40kCal/​kg) and 7–​14g of nitrogen
            every 24h. It is rare for even catabolic patients to exceed these requirements.
            Very high-​caloric diets can lead to fatty liver. Dietetic input is a must.
            Nutritional support for oral cancer patients
            • >50% of head and neck cancer patients are malnourished because
              of the disease itself (e.g. pain, poor appetite, dysphagia), their pre-​
              morbid lifestyle (e.g. excess alcohol and smoking, poor diet, poor social
              support) and co-​morbidities, which affect their well-​being and nutrition).
            • Cancer-​related malnutrition is likely to be multifactorial and has a
              negative prognosis.
            • Side effects from cancer treatment (e.g. mucositis) will further
              exacerbate the problem.
            • A vicious cycle of deficient nutrition with gastrointestinal consequences
              may develop. The immune system may also become depleted, making
              the patient more susceptible to infections.
            •	Malnourishment may be due to nutritional and/​or swallowing difficulties.
            •	Management of patients should be multidisciplinary, with dietetic and
              speech and language therapy (SALT) input.
            Problems specific to oral cancer
            • The cancer itself: pain, restricted mouth opening, difficulties with
              mastication and swallowing.
            • Surgical treatment: further exacerbation of the aforementioned functions
              with ablation (severity depends on site, extent of resection, and
              reconstruction employed), scarring, altered sensation, and loss of teeth.
            • Radiotherapy or chemoradiation: mucositis, loss of taste, xerostomia,
              fibrosis, abnormality in motility and function of pharynx and oesophagus.
            • Combined treatment regimens will compound side effects.
            Assessment
            • Detailed history and clinical assessment:
              • food intake;
              • weight change;
              • appetite;
              • ability to eat;
              • presence of nausea, vomiting, or diarrhoea;
              • psychological state;
              • risk factors associated with disease or likely treatment.
            •	Look for dehydration and signs of malnourishment, e.g. loss of fat in
              skin folds, rough wiry hair.
            •	Measure BMI = weight (kg)/​height (m²). Normally 20–​25. If <19
              consider malnourishment.
                                                Nutritional support             121


Other investigations
Include:
• Serum albumin.
• Total lymphocyte count.
• Body fat—​generally unhelpful in routine practice.
Swallowing assessment
Dysphagia is assessed clinically and with the aid of special investigations
such as videofluoroscopy and fibreoptic endoscope examination (see
% Swallowing in oral cancer, p. 126).
Nutritional support
Nutritional interventions and advice can positively influence outcomes.
Three levels of nutritional support exist:
• Meal fortification: after assessing the patient’s current intake and
  nutritional requirement, oral intake can be improved with advice and
  support, e.g. prescription of type, amount, and frequency of diet, and
  alleviation of symptoms affecting swallowing.
• Oral nutritional supplements: indicated if a patient fails to meet
  nutritional requirements in spite of advice and support. There are a
  variety of liquid and powdered preparations high in energy, protein,
  vitamins, and minerals. They can be used as adjuncts or in isolation.
  Their often bland consistency and monotonous nature can result in taste
  fatigue and negatively affect compliance.
• Non-​oral feeding: whenever possible, the oral route should be
  employed. If the swallow is not safe, try thickeners first (with SALT
  input) before using non-​oral routes.
Enteral feeding
Nutrition administered by the stomach or jejunum via a tube. This route
should be considered if the oral intake is inadequate (usually short term).
It is ideal because oral cancer patients tend to have normal gut function.
Enteral feeding includes:
• NGT feeding:
   • usually via a fine-​bore tube for comfort;
   • short-​term option;
   • narrow tube diameter is reflected in longer feeding times;
   • complications include incorrect site placement, risk of aspiration, tube
      blockage, infections, and obvious visibility on the face.
• Gastrostomy tube feeding:
   • placement of a tube from the abdominal surface into the stomach for
      feeding;
   • appropriate for longer-​term use;
   • associated with reduced risk of displacement and blockage compared
      with NGT;
   • can be easily concealed beneath clothes;
   • complications include bleeding, wound infection, separation of
      stomach from abdominal wall with resulting leakage and peritonitis.
Types of gastrostomy tube
• Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG): placed under LA
  and sedation with the assistance of an endoscope. Its use before
21



     122    Chapter 2      Oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer

             treatment of oral or pharyngeal cancer has rarely been associated with
             implantation of oral tumour into the abdominal wall if the pull-​through
             technique is adopted.
           • Radiologically inserted gastrostomy (RIG): alternative technique that
             requires the stomach to be inflated via an NGT and external puncture
             with aid of radiological imaging. The technique avoids disturbing the
             oropharyngeal region (cancer, recent reconstruction, restricted mouth
             opening).
           Parenteral feeding
           IV feeding has significant risks. In oral cancer, the gut is usually functioning
           and parenteral feeding is rarely required.
           Placement of NGT
           Check NGT feeding is right decision for patient, right time to place, with ap-
           propriate equipment available and sufficient knowledge or expertise avail-
           able to make sure it is safe.
           • Preparation:
             • explain procedure to patient;
             • use an aseptic technique;
             • position patient almost upright (50–​60º) with neck in neutral position;
             • apply topical LA to the nose (optional);
             • measure the radio-​opaque fine-​bore tube to know when to stop
                passing (reach stomach) by measuring the end from the xiphisternum
                to tragus of ear and the across the cheek to the alar rim.
           • Procedure:
             • pass lubricated (with aqueous gel) tube along the floor of the nose
                until its tip reach the nasopharyngeal wall (encounter resistance);
             • ask patient to swallow and with gentle pressure the tube should pass
                downwards into the pharynx;
             • do not allow the patient to tilt their head back as this may encourage
                the tube to go into the trachea instead (a pillow to prop the head
                can help);
             • encourage the patient to swallow, as the tube will pass more easily
                with the peristalsis;
             • once the desired length is reached, the tube is secured with taping,
                record the external tube length in the appropriate notes.
           • Check position:
             • previous guide wire should be left in situ for radiological confirmation
                of tip beneath the diaphragm. A radio-​opaque tube will be visible on
                the CXR;
             • pH testing is the first-​line test method to confirm the NGT is in
                correct position (safe range pH between 1 and 5.5). Record whether
                aspirate obtained, its pH, and who checked and confirmed safe to
                administer feed/​medication;
             • do not use litmus paper or air insufflation and auscultation of air
                turbulence method (National Patient Safety Agency);
             • CXR confirmation is second-​line test method.
                                                Nutritional support            123


• Caution: if patient complains of a sharp pain in chest during the
  procedure, stop, and withdraw as the tube may have passed down a
  bronchus.
• Side effects: include nausea, vomiting, osmotic diarrhoea, tube blockage,
  or displacement.
• Use: the feed is started with water before gradual building up to liquid
  low-​residue food. A pump can be used for the feed. Check local
  policy for monitoring. Repeat checks will be made before each feed,
  administration of medication, and at least once daily as well as any signs
  or symptoms of suspected displacement.
241



      124    Chapter 2      Oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer


            Speech and language therapy
            Role of oral cavity and pharynx in speech
            Voice production is dependent on a steady flow of expired air from the
            lungs. The passage of air through the vocal folds causes a wave-​like mo-
            tion of the cords. The consequent air molecules vibrate creating sound
            (phonation).
               Speech is formed by the active movement of the articulators (soft palate,
            tongue, and lips) that modifies the shape of the vocal tract. These changes
            in vocal tract shape cause the acoustic waveform to form into vowels and
            consonants. In order to produce clear articulation and smooth speech, the
            structure and function of the vocal tract must be intact.
            Articulation of consonants
            Consonants are produced by creating an obstruction of the air stream
            through the vocal tract. They are classified according to the place of ar-
            ticulation and manner of obstruction. They can be voiced or voiceless (no
            vibration when passed through vocal folds). The consonants may be oral
            or nasal (depend on position of soft palate and amount of nasal airflow).
               In the English language, places of articulation are bi-​labial (between lips,
            e.g. p, b, m), labiodental (lower lip to upper front teeth, e.g. f, v), dental
            (tongue tip to front teeth, e.g. th), alveolar (tongue tip to behind front teeth
            and alveolus, e.g. t, d), palatal (front of tongue and hard palate, e.g. ch, j),
            and velar (back of tongue and hard palate, e.g. k, g).
               Three common manners of articulation exist:
            • Plosives: complete closure of articulators, e.g. p, t, k, b, d, g, m, n, ng.
            • Fricatives: closed approximation of articulators causing turbulence, e.g.
               s, sh, f.
            • Approximants: approximation of articulators, but no turbulence, e.g. r, j.
            Articulation of vowels
            Vowels are specified according to the position of the highest point of the
            tongue in the vocal tract, degree of lip rounding, or spread causing changes
            in the resonance of the vocal tract.
            Effect of oral cancer and its treatment on speech
            • Any alteration of the physiology and anatomy of the system due to oral
              cancer and its subsequent treatment can give rise to:
              • dysphonia (impaired voice production); or
              • dysarthria (any weakness, slowness, or incoordination of speech
                production).
            • Speech, like swallowing, will be affected and cause problems with
              communication, psychosocial interaction, and impaired QOL.
            • Common sites affected by oral cancer are the tongue, floor of mouth,
              mandibular alveolus, tongue base, and palate.
            • Speech will be affected depending on the site and size of the index
              tumour, mobility of the residual tongue or oral structures, presence or
              absence of teeth, and type of reconstruction. Other factors include age,
              hearing, pre-​existing co-​morbidities, and motivation.
                                     Speech and language therapy                125


• Poorer speech outcome is more likely with large tumours, restricted or
  absent residual tongue movements, poor oral seal, or absent teeth, all
  of which will produce difficulties in articulation.
• Tumours of the tongue base or soft palate can produce hypernasality,
  solid or liquid escape through the nose, and difficulty with oral plosives.
•	Maxillectomy patients often have hearing problems, with Eustachian
  tube dysfunction causing middle ear effusions.
• Radiotherapy may contribute to speech problems as a result of
  xerostomia. Hearing defects can also occur from auditory canal
  inflammation, wax build-​up, otitis media, fibrosis, and neuromuscular
  dysfunction.
• Chemoradiation causes much higher acute toxicities compared to
  radiotherapy. When used to treat non-​laryngeal head and neck cancer,
  its effect on voice and speech can be long term.
The role of speech and language therapists
Involvement of SALT on the patient journey is well proven to produce
better speech and swallowing outcomes:
• Preoperatively:
   • review what the patient understands and expects;
   • assess preoperative communication;
   • prepare for the subsequent effects for treatment;
   • coordinate a rehabilitation plan.
• Postoperatively:
   • reinforce preoperative information;
   • assess communication impairment;
   • provide exercises and support;
   • liaise with clinicians including prosthetic rehabilitation and audiology
     referral.
The aim is to maximize residual function, develop compensatory mech-
anisms, suggest substitutes for sounds that are impossible to achieve, and
provide appropriate communication aids or strategies. As impaired commu-
nication can be devastating on a psychosocial basis, support is important.
Liaison with other specialities, such as otolaryngology, audiology, and pros-
thetic/​restorative dentistry may be necessary.
261



      126    Chapter 2     Oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer


            Swallowing in oral cancer
            Normal process of swallowing
            An anatomically intact and physiologically functioning oral cavity and
            pharynx are necessary for swallowing to take place normally. Swallowing is
            a complex process where food is carried from the oral cavity through the
            pharynx into the oesophagus and stomach. Once initiated it becomes an
            involuntary, reflex process.
            • Oral stage:
              • this voluntary phase begins with entry of food or fluid into the oral
                 cavity, and ends with start of the pharyngeal phase;
              • food is mixed with saliva to turn it into a consistency suitable
                 for swallowing. For this process to occur normally, it requires a
                 competent lip seal and ability to manipulate food with saliva using oral
                 cavity structures (jaws, teeth, tongue, floor of mouth, cheeks, and
                 palate);
              • the mobile oral tongue is important in moving the food bolus around
                 and propelling it backwards into the pharynx.
            • Pharyngeal stage:
              • arrival of a food bolus into the pharynx triggers an involuntary
                 process where the airway inlet is closed with a temporary cessation
                 in breathing to prevent food entering the lungs (larynx is raised,
                 epiglottis displaced backwards and glottis closed);
              • soft palate elevates with pharyngeal wall contraction to seal off the
                 nose (velopharyngeal seal);
              • tongue base contracts and with the pharyngeal constrictor muscles
                 produces a peristaltic wave that pushes the bolus down into the
                 oesophagus;
              • cricopharyngeus muscle relaxes to allow entry into the oesophagus.
            • Oesophageal stage: food bolus is propelled down the length of the
               oesophagus into the stomach as part of an involuntary process.
            Impact of oral and oropharyngeal cancer
            A large proportion of patients with oral and pharyngeal cancer will have
            swallowing problems. These problems may have a significant impact on
            their recovery, physical and emotional well-​being, as well as psychosocial
            interactions. The standard curative treatment for early oral cancer is to try
            to embody one treatment modality only. The choice of that treatment mo-
            dality will depend on the site of the tumour, and to some extent the pref-
            erence of the MDT or patient. More advanced disease is usually treated
            with surgery and reconstruction followed by adjuvant radiotherapy. There
            is a trend towards chemoradiotherapy in the desire for organ preservation
            in oropharyngeal cancer. However, organ preservation may not be syn-
            onymous with preservation of function. All current treatment modalities
            have significant impacts on swallowing.
            Effect of cancer on swallowing
            Oropharyngeal cancer may cause pain, as well as alterations in the anatom-
            ical and physiological functioning of eating and swallowing. As a result, the
            nutritional status of an individual may be adversely affected.
                                       Swallowing in oral cancer                 127


Effect of surgery on swallowing
This is well documented and can manifest itself in the first few months.
The effect of surgery on swallowing depends on the site, size of resec-
tion, mode of reconstruction, and loss of cranial nerve function. Swallowing
problems following surgery are more likely with:
• Pre-​treatment swallowing dysfunction.
•	Larger resection.
• Posteriorly placed tumours (e.g. base of tongue, soft palate).
• Existing co-​morbidities.
• Reconstruction (may also be due to size, sensate flap may help).
• Combined treatment (e.g. adjuvant radiotherapy).
For glossectomies, ensuring residual tongue mobility is important to maxi-
mize function. Patients who have undergone surgery have i oral prepar-
ation times (impaired chewing), slower oral transit times, residual food
bolus, and risk of aspiration.
Effect of radiotherapy on swallowing
Although there is no removal of tissue, the effects of radiotherapy on swal-
lowing occur on a more gradual basis. The effects are dependent on:
• Total radiation dose.
• Fraction size.
• Radiated volume.
• Site and size of tumour.
• Treatment technique.
• Whether patient continues to smoke.
• Combined modalities.
Swallowing is affected acutely (after 10–​14 days onwards) because of pain,
mucositis, loss of taste, and lethargy. Late complications such as xerostomia,
fibrosis, and neuromuscular dysfunction are delayed contributory factors to
dysphagia.
Effect of chemoradiotherapy on swallowing
The addition of chemotherapy to radiation is associated with greater acute
toxicity side effects in addition to nausea and vomiting. The resultant dys-
phagia (acutely and possibly more severe long term) are similar to radio-
therapy alone, i.e. i oropharyngeal transit times, d tongue base contact
with posterior pharyngeal wall, reduced laryngeal elevation, i bolus
residue, abnormal oesophageal sphincter function, and aspiration (attrib-
uted to xerostomia, fibrosis, and neuromuscular dysfunction).
Dysphagia and aspiration
The main problems following treatment are dysphagia (difficulty in swal-
lowing) and aspiration (penetration of food/​fluid through laryngeal inlet
into lungs). Both are symptoms of abnormal oral and pharyngeal phases of
swallowing. Bolus residue is contributory to aspiration, and a consequence
of swallowing dysfunction and altered sensation. In the acute stage, the
presence of an indwelling tracheostomy tube may exacerbate dysphagia.
281



      128    Chapter 2     Oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer

            Assessment of swallowing
            Bedside assessment
            A trained SALT:
            • Takes a history.
            • Assesses the gag reflex, voluntary and reflex cough, vocal quality and
              volume, reflex and voluntary swallow, posture, respiration, oral motor
              strength, and range of motions.
            • Observes swallowing using a standardized dysphagia evaluation protocol
              with different food consistencies—​the swallow performance can be
              classified.
            Aspiration may be clinically apparent or inferred. However, silent aspiration
            can still take place leaving the dilemma of whether to restrict oral intake
            or not.
            Methods of further investigation
            • Videofluoroscopy: this modified barium swallow is the cited gold
              standard in swallow assessment and allows for a descriptive dynamic
              study, as well as objective measurements of swallowing functions, such
              as transit times, detection of bolus residue, and aspiration.
            • Fibreoptic endoscopic evaluation: this can be used to enhance a bedside
              assessment, offering a view different from videofluoroscopy. It cannot
              demonstrate the oral phase, but does not involve radiation. The goal
              of this assessment is to determine the presence and cause of any
              aspiration, and to determine whether behavioural therapy is available to
              eliminate aspiration.
            Manoeuvres to help improve swallowing
            • Chilled food helps re-​educate lost sensation.
            • Encourage chewing or manipulation of bolus in mouth to facilitate
              initiation of swallow reflex.
            • Altering the temperature, taste, and texture of food in a meal to keep
              awareness of swallowing process high.
            • Place food in parts of mouth where sensation is intact.
            • Viscous boluses (e.g. thickened liquid and purees) will enable poorly
              coordinated muscles to produce a more effective swallow than with thin
              liquids.
            • Head or body tilting in the appropriate direction can utilize gravity in the
              swallowing process.
            Hints or risks of aspiration
            • Wet or gurgling noises with breathing—​fluid in the airways.
            • Altered voice during eating—​food on vocal cords.
            • Cough associated with swallowing.
            • Fatigue during a meal.
            •	Lower cranial nerve palsies.
            • Extensive resections.
            • Aspiration pneumonia.
            It is important to seek urgent advice from a SALT if appropriate. Ideally, pa-
            tients should be continually assessed and followed up throughout their care.
                                       Swallowing in oral cancer                  129


Strategies for reducing risk of aspiration
• Patient should not eat unattended.
• Patient should eat sitting upright—​body or head tilt may be useful.
• Avoid distractions at meal times.
• Other techniques (depends on the particular situation):
  • turning head towards paralysed side of face, tongue, or treated neck
    (encourage passage down competent side);
  • flexing neck while swallowing;
  • double swallow;
  • supraglottic or super supraglottic swallow (SALT).

There is variable tolerance of aspiration between individuals and diagnostic
groups. The incompetent swallow will need careful evaluation and nil by
mouth if considered a serious risk and therapeutic support/​interventions.
Strategies to reduce dysphagia
Treatment of established dysphagia is difficult and rarely effective. Methods
to prevent or reduce dysphagia include:
• Swallowing exercise regimen (compliance reduces incidence of tube
  dependency).
• Treatment modifications such as intensity-​modulated radiotherapy
  (sparing salivary glands and other critical swallowing structures, i.e. oral
  cavity, supraglottic and larynx, and pharyngeal constrictors).
• Radioprotectors—​mixed evidence in reducing xerostomia.
• Technical advancements such as volumetric intensity modulated arc
  therapy and image-​guided radiotherapy may be beneficial.
Prognosis
There are few qualitative long-​term studies in this area. Nevertheless, pa-
tients at high risk of swallowing dysfunction should be counselled prior to
treatment. Patients are supported for some months following treatment
when the healing is completed, residual swelling is reduced, and main radio-
therapy effects are seen. It is concluded when both patient and SALT feel a
maximum swallowing potential has been reached.
Alternative feeding routes
If the risk of aspiration is real and significant, then the patient cannot take
food orally. The enteral feeding routes will need to be used instead, e.g.
NGTs or gastrostomy tubes (see % Nutritional support, p. 120).
   The issue of optimal feeding method (NGT vs gastrostomy tube feeding)
remains unclear in a recent systematic review. There is a variable approach
with prophylactic and reactive gastrostomy tube placement instead of NGT
feed. Prophylactic gastrostomy tube placement is associated with earlier
better nutrition, earlier weight gains, and less hospital admissions. There are
associated risks with procedure. Concerns with prolonged tube depend-
ence and long-​term dysphagia are additional reasons for a reactive gastros-
tomy tube practice.
301



      130    Chapter 2     Oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer


            Psychosocial aspects
            Today’s society puts increasing emphasis on physical attractiveness and,
            thus, the face and mouth are central to social interaction. Oral cancer treat-
            ment can result in facial disfigurement and alteration of function, e.g. im-
            paired speech, eating, or swallowing, and loss of non-​verbal cues due to
            paralysis. These can have profound effects on the patient through altered
            body image, loss of self-​esteem, negative feelings (e.g. depression, loneli-
            ness, anxiety), and loss of sexuality or sexual functioning. People’s reactions
            to facial disfigurement or abnormal communication cues can sometimes
            be obvious and, in so doing, appear rude. This can result in the patient
            feeling stigmatized. Chronic pain will exacerbate any element of depres-
            sion. Patients may become more sensitive to adverse reactions, react with
            aggression, and seek refuge by avoiding social interactions or use alcohol
            and drugs excessively.
            Improving psychosocial outcomes
            Depression
            Depression is not always easy to detect as it shares some similar symp-
            toms to fatigue and other consequences of cancer treatment. Input from
            the clinical nurse specialist is invaluable. The use of simple tools, such as
            the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS), concern checklists,
            and QOL measurements, may help identify patients at risk. These patients
            should be given appropriate support and coping strategies. If necessary,
            they can be referred for psychological counselling.
            Coping strategies
            Psychosocial outcomes can be improved by:
            • Developing confidence in performing new self-​caring skills, e.g.
               gastrostomy tube or prostheses care.
            • Confronting and acceptance of changed body image.
            • Teaching interventions to maximize recovery, e.g. physiotherapy and
               speech exercises.
            • Teaching adaptations (occupational therapy).
            • Providing nutritional and communication support (dietician and SALT).
            • Rehearsal of public encounters/​questions and responses.
            • Educating family to improve support.
            • Encouraging active participation in support groups.
            It has been shown that the majority of head and neck cancer patients have
            psychological problems and a perceived poorer QOL compared with other
            cancer patients. Psychosocial support and interventions are as important
            as a patient’s physical care since improving outcome in these often neg-
            lected areas can maximize their level of functioning, social interaction, and
            therefore QOL.
Psychosocial aspects   131
321



      132    Chapter 2     Oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer


            Health-​related quality of life
            Oral cancer and its treatment have a profound effect on patients. They may
            have physical, functional, psychosocial, and cosmetically disfiguring prob-
            lems. Traditional outcomes have centred on control of disease and survival.
            Clinician-​centred feedback and questionnaires tended to under-​report pa-
            tient problems and may even have been irrelevant from the patient’s point
            of view.
                Although ultimate survival remains relevant, an increasingly important
            measurement of outcome is QOL. This commonly used term is recognized
            by lay people, often implies a sense of well-​being, and is associated with
            patient satisfaction. It is a difficult term to define and is best considered as
            a multidimensional concept. Even when applied to health its definition re-
            mains controversial. In addition to areas such as physical, functional, psycho-
            logical, and social functioning, other aspects to consider include economic/​
            financial, occupational, and domestic/​family (including sexuality) domains.
                Many QOL tools have been proposed. There is no ideal QOL question-
            naire. In order to measure outcome, the chosen QOL questionnaire should
            be acceptable, valid, reliable, and respond to the questions being asked, i.e.
            fit for purpose, as well as practical to use.
            Health-​related quality of life
            Health-​related quality of life (HRQOL) is considered to be a specific subset
            of QOL, assessing symptoms, psychological aspects, and function in a struc-
            tured way. It is used in many aspects of healthcare including cancer. There
            are many HRQOL tools available. They are now often questionnaire based
            and self-​completed by patients. They can be used in a cross-​sectional or
            longitudinal manner.
               Other methods include semi-​structured interviews and qualitative ap-
            proaches. These are more time-​consuming and can be influenced by the
            interviewer.
            HRQOL tools used in head and neck cancer
            In addition to global domains, HRQOL questionnaires commonly include
            head and neck-​specific domains. Even within the head and neck cancer
            questions there is recognition that oral cancer (and its subsequent treat-
            ment) will have influences on other subsites.
               There are three commonly used HRQOL questionnaires.
            University of Washington Quality of Life (UW-​QOL)
            • An extensively used (and validated) patient-​based, self-​administered
              questionnaire consisting of 15 questions.
            • 12 disease-​specific items (pain, appearance, activity, recreation,
              swallowing, chewing, speech, shoulder problems, taste, saliva, mood,
              and anxiety).
            • Three general items measuring global HRQOL.
            • An importance rating section is included, where patients rate which
              domain changes were most significant to them.
            • There is also a free-​text section allowing patients to address any issues
              not otherwise covered, as well as the clinician’s insight into patient’s
              concerns.
                                       Health-related quality of life                 133


• Disease-​specific questions are scored 0 (worst) to 100 (best) with the
  three global questions being scored separately.
• Considered a broad-​based assessment of disease-​specific functional
  status, suitable for routine low-​cost use, and remains the most common
  questionnaire used by head and neck cancer surgeons.
European Organisation for Research Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) Quality
of Life Questionnaire Head and Neck-​35 (QLQ-​H&N 35)
• Another extensively used (and validated) patient-​based, self-​
   administered questionnaire to assess head and neck cancer patients.
• Seven domains (pain, swallowing, senses, speech, social eating, social
   contact. and sexuality) as well as 11 single items inquiring about dental
   problems, restricted mouth opening, sticky saliva, cough, feeling ill, analgesic
   use, nutritional supplement use, feeding tube, and weight loss/​gain.
•	Used in conjunction with EORTC QLQ-​C30, making it relatively long
   and more time-​consuming for patients.
Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy Scale (FACT-​HNS)
• This reliable and responsive questionnaire has been used in numerous
  head and neck cancer studies.
• Contains 11 specific items covering topics, such as eating, swallowing,
  appearance, smoking, and alcohol habits.
• Scored on a 0–​4 Likert scale.
Factors affecting HRQOL in oral cancer
When followed over time, the HRQOL of oral cancer patients decreases
at 3 months after treatment before recovering to approach or attain pre-
operative levels around 1 year after surgery (pattern for most site-​specific
issues except senses, mouth opening, saliva consistency, and coughing, all
of which remain poor in the long term). The 1-​year score is indicative and
usually stays at that level over the longer term.
   Factors associated with poorer HRQOL in treated oral cancer patients
include:
• Posterior tumours.
• Advanced overall stage or T stage.
• Pre-​treatment depression.
• Presence of co-​morbidities.
• RND.
•	More complex reconstruction.
• Need for gastrostomy tube feeding.
• Combine treatment (surgery + radiotherapy or chemoradiotherapy).
HRQOL measurements can be used to help:
• In the process of treatment planning (patients and clinicians).
• Provide patients with an overview of their proposed treatment, side
   effects, and recovery trajectory.
• Evaluate therapeutic (curative and palliative) interventions.
• Identify an individual patient’s needs for additional supportive
   interventions, i.e. as a screening tool (e.g. Patients Concerns Inventory).
• Identify areas for audit and research.
341



      134    Chapter 2     Oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer

            HRQOL provides a structured insight into the patient’s perspective. It has
            been demonstrated to be an effective and useful measurement of outcome.
            However, its use as a routine and universal clinical measurement tool is
            hampered by time constraints, manpower restrictions, traditional emphasis
            on survival and complication rates, and difficulty in deciding which validated
            HRQOL tool to use. This aside, its use in research continues to progress
            significantly. The ready availability of electronic data capture and immediate
            analysis with the aid of touch-​screen technology along with clinic tools
            such as the Patients Concerns Inventory will increase the usefulness and
            acceptability of HRQOL assessment within day-​to-​day practice. HRQOL
            measurement will be essential to help evaluate efficacy of newer treatment
            options, symptom management, and long-​term cancer survivor issues.
Health-related quality of life   135
361



      136    Chapter 2     Oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer


            Palliative care
            Palliative care is the active total care of patients whose disease is not re-
            sponsive to curative treatment. Its aim is to achieve the best QOL for the
            patients and their relatives. The key principles of palliative care are:
            •	Management of pain and other symptoms.
            • Disease management.
            • Provision of psychological, social, and spiritual support.
            Oral cancer
            The prognosis for oral cancer depends on many factors. Early-​stage disease
            if treated effectively has a 5-​year survival of 80–​90%. Stage 4 disease has a
            much poorer prognosis, with survival rates of <30%. Although locoregional
            control has improved with time, the overall survival rates (~55%) have re-
            mained static due to distant metastases and second primaries. Recurrence
            often heralds a poor prognosis.
            Problems faced by terminal oral cancer patients
            Oral cancer patients with incurable disease often have highly symptomatic
            problems, poor social or family support, addictive alcohol problems, and
            their palliative care can be challenging.
            General problems
            • Fatigue.
            • Anorexia.
            • Disturbed sleep.
            • Weight loss and feeding problems.
            • Anxiety and depression.
            • Psychosocial problems.
            • Existing addictive problems with alcohol and smoking.
            Head and neck specific problems
            • Pain.
            • Shoulder dysfunction.
            • Disfigurement and stigmatization (may lead to social isolation).
            • Speech, hearing, and communication problems.
            • Dysphagia.
            • Oral problems:
              • loss of teeth (impact on chewing and eating);
              • dry mouth/​sticky saliva;
              • diminished taste;
              • infections, caries, and osteoradionecrosis.
            • Fistulae (cutaneous or mucosal).
            • Fungating and malodorous tumours.
            • Bleeding.
            Communication
            In order to achieve good palliative care there must be effective communi-
            cation conducted in appropriate setting. The patient should be given time
            and space to voice his or her problems and fears. The clinician needs to
                                                           Palliative care          137


listen with empathy, clarify the patient’s physical, emotional, and psycho-
logical needs, allay any fears, and correct any misconceptions. This approach
will enable the patient to feel understood and cared for. His or her needs
can be met where possible and informed choices made for the future, e.g.
resuscitation, etc.
Prognostication of end of life
This is notoriously difficult to predict accurately. There are many good
reasons for both patients and clinicians wanting to know when life is likely
to end, e.g. for patient and family to plan ahead, provide insight for patient,
help clinicians in treatment plan/​care, establish patient’s eligibility for care
programmes, and financial support packages. However, there are many haz-
ards of getting it wrong. There has been a shift in attitudes with increasing
patient expectation and, in response, clinicians being more open/​candid
in their disclosures. It is important to put emphasis on QOL, rather than
merely lengthening it chronologically.
Management of symptoms
Pain
Two-​thirds of patients with advanced disease often have pain. Pain in oral
cancer can be due to local tumour infiltration causing ulceration or infec-
tion, vascular and lymphatic occlusion, nerve involvement, referred pain,
or treatment-​related (e.g. mucositis). It is important to try to evaluate the
type(s) of pain. Pains are often mixed, but are mainly:
• Nociceptive:
   • arising from stimulation of peripheral nerves transmitted from an
     undamaged nervous system;
   • often described as aching in skin or deeper tissues (account for three-​
     quarters of pain type in studies).
• Neuropathic:
   • arising from damage to the peripheral or central nervous system;
   • may present with hyperalgesia and allodynia;
   • often described as burning or stabbing.

Assessment
Take a detailed history, examine for masses, joint problems, dental and oral
causes, cranial nerve involvement, etc. Investigations where appropriate,
e.g. radiological.
Management
• Nociceptive pain: usually respond to analgesics.
• Neuropathic pain: may only partially respond to opioids.
Pain control is aimed at removing the cause if possible and pain relief is pro-
vided in line with the World Health Organization (WHO) analgesic ladder:
• Step 1: non-​opioids ± adjuvants:
   • paracetamol 1g every 4–​6h regularly, maximum 4g over 24h;
   • if this does not work after 24h, move up ladder.
• Step 2: weak opioids + non-​opioids ± adjuvants. Paracetamol 1g and
   codeine (30mg not 8mg) or dihydrocodeine regularly every 4–​6h.
381



      138    Chapter 2     Oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer

            • Step 3: strong opioids + non opioids ± adjuvants:
              • morphine 5–​10mg every 4h (NB: 60mg codeine equianalgesic with
                5mg morphine every 4h);
              • if pain controlled and no significant side effects (e.g. drowsiness,
                hallucinations, confusion, vomiting, myoclonus, pin point pupils),
                titrate dosage upwards (no more than 30–​50%) every 24h until pain
                controlled;
              • give up to 50% more than usual late evening dose if woken up
                with pain;
              • give prophylactic laxative;
              • if nausea or vomiting, give antiemetics or consider alternative opioid;
              • if acute overdose, e.g. significant respiratory depression, consider
                naloxone (NB: shorter half-​life than opioids).
            Adjuvants
            These co-​analgesics if combined with analgesics can enhance pain control:
            • Steroids: oedema pain.
            • Antidepressant or anticonvulsant: neuropathic pain.
            • Non-​steroidal anti-​inflammatory drug (NSAID): inflammation.
            • Night sedative: if lack of sleep/​reduced pain threshold.
            • Muscle relaxant: cramps.
            • Anxiolytic: anxiety.
            • Antibiotics: infection.
            Breakthrough pain
            • If occurs before next dose due, consider increasing background dose.
            • If associated with predicted activity, give analgesia prior to it.
            • Consider slow-​release preparation.
            • If poor absorption or unable to take orally, consider transdermal or
              transmucosal preparations, e.g. fentanyl.
            Other methods of pain relief
            • Tumour mass reduction with surgery, radiotherapy, or chemotherapy.
            • Radiotherapy for bone metastases.
            • Nerve blocks.
            • Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS).
            • Acupuncture.
            • Psychological interventions.
            Oral problems
            • Restricted mouth opening and paraesthesia.
            • Dry mouth/​sticky saliva (xerostomia).
            •	Mucositis with resultant poor oral hygiene.
            • Infections.
            • Fungating tumour.
            Management
            • Oral hygiene care and adequate hydration.
            • Relief with sugar-​free drops, pineapple chunks/​juice.
            • Prescription of artificial saliva, sialagogues, pilocarpine.
            • Treatment of infection.
            • Treatment of mucositis: topical LA preparations, coating agents,
              steroids, or anti-​inflammatory agents plus analgesia.
                                                        Palliative care         139


Communication problems
Problems with speech and hearing are common. Pharyngeal surgery or
maxillectomy can cause Eustachian tube dysfunction. Empathy, time, and
space are essential to lessen the impact. Regular input from a SALT and
communication aids are vital.
Dysphagia
Tumour mass or the effect of previous treatments may necessitate con-
sideration of a gastrostomy tube placement. This can be a difficult deci-
sion with ethical dilemmas to consider, in particular if the end point is not
clear-​cut. A systematic evaluation is necessary to ensure treatable causes
are not missed.
Respiratory obstruction
Obstruction of a tracheostomy tube may be due to secretions, crusting,
displacement, or granulation tissue.
• Prevent with humidification and good tracheostomy tube care.
• Warning signs include:
   • increasing secretions;
   • difficulty with expectoration;
   • bleeding;
   • stridor.

Management of airway obstruction
• Summon help.
• Sit patient up and ask them to cough.
•	Use suction.
•	Manipulate head to reduce any kinking of tube.
•	Give O2.
• Remove inner tube and apply suction.
• If terminal care advised and obstruction persists, sedation should be
  considered to lessen the impact of the inevitable.
Fungating and malodorous tumours
A visibly fungating tumour will affect the patient, and his or her contacts,
both physically and emotionally. There may be fistula formation and salivary
leakage. Eating and drinking may become impossible.
Management
• Reduce secretions with medication (but side effects may occur).
• Consider palliative radiotherapy, chemotherapy, or surgery.
•	Good wound care is mainstay treatment.
• Debridement and desloughing.
• Saline irrigation and frequent dressing.
• Ensure good room ventilation and external deodorizers.
• Frequent bedsheet or clothes changes.
• Topical antibiotics (e.g. metronidazole gel) or other agents (e.g.
  flamazine, activated charcoal preparation, live yoghurt, honey).
• Systemic antibiotics if signs of infection.
401



      140     Chapter 2          Oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer

            Major bleeding
            The main source of a major bleed is usually the carotid artery or its branches.
            The vessel wall may be breached by direct tumour invasion, postoperative
            infection, erosion by tracheostomy tube, or may be a late effect of radio-
            therapy. A sentinel bleed may herald a forthcoming carotid rupture.
            Management
            • Resuscitation, stenting, or open surgical interventions, but may merely
              postpone the inevitable.
            • Forewarning patients and their carers: a difficult issue (where they can
              cope, being prepared may lessen the impact).
            • Avoid inappropriate resuscitation. This can happen if unfamiliar
              healthcare personnel are involved.
            • Adopt a reassuring confident approach (even if you don’t feel it!).
            • Prepare enough dressings/​towels to contain the spillage (if anticipated).
            • IV sedative (5–​10mg midazolam) with strong opioid analgesia
              (diamorphine) to lessen the impact for patient.
            Terminal phase
            This is defined as the period when day-​to-​day deterioration, particularly
            strength, appetite, and awareness, is occurring.
            Key aims of terminal care
            • Ensure the patient’s comfort physically, emotionally, and spiritually.
            •	Make the end of life peaceful and dignified.
            • Provide support to the close ones.
            Hospices
            The proportion of patients dying at home is declining in the UK, while the
            proportion dying in hospital is conversely increasing. This shift may be due
            to increasing reliance on technology, social changes within the family, or the
            lesser availability of community or pastoral support.
               The majority of terminally ill head and neck cancer patients deteriorate
            gradually with their demise being precipitated by bronchopneumonia or
            co-​morbidity-​related issues. Hospices and associated palliative care teams
            input are important in helping ease suffering for terminally ill patients.
            Other reasons for admission to hospices include pain and symptom con-
            trol, respite, or intermediate care, e.g. for convalescence following radical
            radiotherapy.
            Further reading
            Agrawal, G., Gupta, A., Chaudhary, V., Qureshi, F., Choraria, A., Dubey, H. (2018). Medial sural ar-
               tery perforator flap for head and neck reconstruction. Ann Maxillofac Surg 8(1): 61–​5.
            Amin, M.B., Edge, S.B., Greene, F.L., Gershenwald, J.E., Brookland, R.K., Meyer, L., et al. (eds) (2017).
               AJCC cancer staging manual, 8th edn. Springer, New York.
            Bleier, B.S., Levine, M.S., Mick, R., Rubesin, S.E., Sack, S.Z., McKinney, K., et al. (2007). Dysphagia after
               chemoradiation: analysis by modified barium swallow. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 116(11): 837–​41.
            Brierley, J.D., Gospodarowicz, M.K., Wittekind, C. (eds) (2016). TNM classification of malignant tu-
               mours, 8th edn. Wiley-​Blackwell, Oxford.
            D’Cruz AK, Vaish R, Kapre N, Dandekar M, Gupta S, Hawaldar R, et al. (2015). Elective versus thera-
               peutic neck dissection in node-​negative oral cancer. N Engl J Med 373(6): 521–​9.
                                                                                    Palliative care                   141

Dwivedi, R.C., Kazi, R.A., Agrawal, N., Nutting, C.M., Clarke, P.M., Kerawala, C.J., et al. (2009).
   Evaluation of speech outcomes following treatment of oral cancer and oropharyngeal cancers.
   Cancer Treat Rev 35: 417–​24.
D’Souza, G., Kreimer, A.R., Viscidi, R., Pawlita, M., Fakhry, C., Koch, W.M., et al. (2007). Case-​
   control study of human papillomavirus and oropharyngeal cancer. N Engl J Med 356: 1944–​56.
Forbes, K. (1997). Palliative care in patients with cancer of the head and neck. Clin Otolaryngol
   22: 117–​22.
Grobbelaar, E.J., Owen, S., Torrance, A.D., Wilson, J.A. (2004). Nutritional challenges in head and
   neck cancer. Clin Otolaryngol 29: 307–​13.
Hansson, B.G., Rosenquist, K., Antonsson, A., Wennerberg, J., Schildt, E.B., Bladstrom, A., et al.
   (2005). Strong association between infection with human papillomavirus and oral and oropharyn-
   geal squamous cell carcinoma: a population-​based case-​control study in southern Sweden. Acta
   Otolaryngol 125: 1337–​44.
Herrero, R., Castellsague, X., Pawlita, M., Lissowska, J., Kee, F., Balaram, P., et al. (2003). Human
   papillomavirus and oral cancer: the International Agency for Research on Cancer multicenter
   study. J Natl Cancer Inst 95(23): 1772–​83.
Information Services Division. NHS National Services Scotland. M https://​www.isdscotland.org/​
Kumar, B., Cordell, K.G., Lee, J.S., Prince, M.E., Tran, H.H., Wolf, G.T., et al. (2007). Response to
   therapy and outcomes in oropharyngeal cancer are associated with biomarkers including human
   papillomavirus, epidermal growth factor receptor, gender and smoking. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
   69(2 Suppl): S109–​11.
Mittal, B.B., Pauloski, B.R., Haraf, D.J., Pelzer, N.J., Argiris, A., Vokes, E.E., et al. (2003). Swallowing
   dysfunction—​preventive and rehabilitation strategies in patients with head and neck cancers
   treated with surgery, radiotherapy and chemotherapy: a critical review. Int J Radiation Oncol Biol
   Phys 57: 1219–​30.
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (2016, updated 2018). Management of the N0
   neck in T1–​2 squamous cell carcinoma of the oral cavity, recommendations 1.3.4 & 1.3.5.
   In: Cancer of the upper aerodigestive tract: assessment and management in people aged 16
   and over. NICE Guideline [NG36]. M https://​www.nice.org.uk/​guidance/​ng36/​chapter/​
   Recommendations#treatment-​of-​early-​stage-​disease
Rogers, S.N. (2010). Quality of life perspectives in patients with oral cancer. Oral Oncol 46: 445–​7.
Soo, K.C., Tan, E.H., Wee, J., Lim, D., Tai, B.C., Khoo, M.L., et al. (2005). Surgery and adjuvant radio-
   therapy vs concurrent chemoradiotherapy in stage III/​IV nonmetastatic squamous cell head and
   neck cancer: a randomised comparison. Br J Cancer 93: 279–​86.
Schilling, C., Stoeckli, S.J., Vigili, M.G., de Bree, R., Lai, S.Y., Alvarez, J., et al. (2019). Surgical consensus
   guidelines on sentinel node biopsy (SNB) in patients with oral cancer. Head Neck 41(8): 2655–​64.
Urken, M.L., Cheney, M.L., Blackwell, K.E., Harris, J.R., Hadlock, T.A., Futran, N. (2011). Atlas of re-
   gional and free flaps for head and neck reconstruction: flap harvest and insetting, 2nd edn. Lippincott
   Williams and Wilkins, Baltimore, MD.
Wadsley, J.C., Bentzen, S.M. (2004). Investigation of relationship between change in locoregional
   control and change in overall survival in randomized controlled trials of modified radiotherapy in
   head-​and-​neck cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 60: 1405–​9.
Watson, M., Ward, S., Vallath, N., Wells, J., Campbell, R. (2019). Oxford handbook of palliative care,
   3rd edn. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Webster-​Gardy, J., Madden, A., Holdsworth, M. (2015). Oxford handbook of nutrition and dietetics,
   2nd edn. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Support resources
Changing Faces: M http://​www.changingfaces.org.uk
Macmillan Cancer Support: M http://​www.macmillan.org.uk
Marie Curie Cancer Care: M http://​www.mariecurie.org.uk
421
 Chapter 3                               143



Surgical dermatology
Common skin terms 144
Skin types 145
Ultraviolet radiation and the skin 146
Premalignant skin lesions 148
Skin cancer 150
Basal cell carcinoma 152
Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma 156
Cutaneous melanoma 160
Rare skin cancers 166
Reconstructive options 168
Complications 174
41



     144    Chapter 3     Surgical dermatology


           Common skin terms
           • Bulla: a circumscribed elevation of skin of 0.5cm or more in diameter
             containing liquid. The distinction between vesicle and bulla is arbitrary
             and depends only on size (vesicles are <0.5cm).
           • Comedone: a plug of keratin and sebum in a dilated pilosebaceous pore.
           • Crust: outer layer from the drying of exudate, secretion, or
             haemorrhage.
           • Cutaneous (keratin) horn: exophytic compacted keratin, 20% are cSCC.
           • Ephelide/​freckle: area of i melanin production from a normal number
             of melanocytes secondary to solar exposure in genetically susceptible
             individuals.
           • Erysipelas: bacterial cellulitis caused by streptococci. Bullae may develop
             in the area of cellulitis.
           • Impetigo: an infection of the skin classically caused by Staphylococcus
             aureus.
           • In-​transit metastasis: metastasis found in cutaneous lymphatic channels
             >2cm from primary, but not reaching regional lymph nodes.
           • Koebner phenomenon: the occurrence of a skin condition at the site of
             trauma. Typically seen in psoriasis and lichen planus.
           • Lentiginous lesion: linear hyperplasia of melanocytes along the
             basement membrane of epidermis—​solar lentigo, simple lentigo.
             Remain stable in colour with varied exposure to sunlight.
           • Lichenification: a chronic thickening of the epidermis with exaggeration
             of its normal markings, often as a result of (chronic) scratching or
             rubbing.
           • Macule: flat lesion defined by an area of changed colour.
           • Melanocytic lesion: multilevel proliferation or ‘nests’ of melanocytes—​
             melanocytic naevus. Most are pigmented (unless intradermal).
           • MIN (melanocytic intraepidermal neoplasia): melanoma in situ.
           • Morphoea: localized sclerosis of the skin.
           • Naevus: a ‘mole’. May be congenital and may contain melanocytes
             (melanocytic naevus):
             • intradermal naevus—​melanocytes in the dermis;
             • junctional naevus—​melanocytes at the dermal epidermal junction;
             • compound naevus—​melanocytes in both the dermis and at the
                junction;
             • Spitz naevus—​pink nodule seen on the face of children, grows rapidly
                and histologically difficult to distinguish from malignant melanoma.
           • Nodule: raised, round lesion >5mm in diameter.
           • Papule: raised, solid lesion.
           • Plaque: lesion >5mm in diameter with a flat, plateau-​like surface.
           • Pustule: raised lesion containing purulent exudates.
           • Rosacea: common facial skin condition with erythema, telangiectasia,
             pustules with development of rhinophyma in advanced cases.
           • Satellite metastasis: grossly evident metastatic skin lesion within
             immediate vicinity of primary tumour (<2cm). A metastasis, not a
             second primary.
           • Wheal (urticaria, hive): papule or plaque that is pale pink, pruritic, and
             may appear annular (ring-​like). Wheals are transient, lasting only 24–​48h
             in any defined area.
                                                              Skin types      145


Skin types
Racial variation in skin pigmentation relates to the amount of melanin pro-
duced, not the number of melanocytes in a person’s skin.
Fitzpatrick classification
•	Type I:
  • very light;
  • often burns, rarely tans;
  • tends to have freckles, red or blond hair, blue or green eyes.
•	Type II:
  • light, or light-​skinned European;
  • usually burns, sometimes tans;
  • tends to have light hair, blue/​g reen or brown eyes.
•	Type III:
  • light intermediate or dark-​skinned European;
  • sometimes burns, usually tans;
  • tends to have brown eyes and hair.
•	Type IV:
  • dark intermediate, also ‘Mediterranean’ or ‘olive’;
  • sometimes burns, often tans;
  • tends to have dark brown eyes and hair.
•	Type V:
  • dark or ‘brown’ type;
  • naturally black-​brown skin;
  • usually has black-​brown eyes and hair.
•	Type VI:
  • very dark or ‘black’ type;
  • naturally black-​brown skin;
  • usually has black-​brown eyes and hair.
461



      146    Chapter 3     Surgical dermatology


            Ultraviolet radiation and the skin
            • Ultraviolet (UV) radiation is emitted by the sun.
            • 98% of radiation is UVA, all UVC and most UVB is absorbed before the
              earth’s surface.
            • UVB aids with vitamin D synthesis, and causes tanning.
            • UVA can penetrate into the dermis.
            • UVB can cause painful erythema, and cumulative damage can cause skin
              cancer.
            •	Epidermal melanin provides some UV protection (Fitzpatrick), but even
              dark skin will burn at high-​dose UV radiation.
            Sun protection factor and sunscreens
            • Physical sunscreens contain particles (titanium dioxide, zinc oxide), that
              reflect and scatter UV radiation.
            • Chemical sunscreens absorb UVA and UVB radiation of certain
              wavelengths.
            • Sun protection factor (SPF) indicates the UVB photoprotection. An SPF
              of 30 means it takes 30× longer for host skin to burn.
Ultraviolet radiation and the skin   147
481



      148    Chapter 3      Surgical dermatology


            Premalignant skin lesions
            Actinic (solar) keratosis
            • Scaly, hyperkeratotic, often multiple skin lesions.
            • Common on head and neck due to chronic sun exposure.
            •	Histologically show varying degrees of epidermal keratinocyte dysplasia.
            • When full-​thickness epidermal dysplasia = Bowen’s disease or
              Bowenoid solar keratoses or in situ SCC (higher risk of malignant
              transformation).
            •	If multiple actinic keratoses, higher risk of cutaneous SCC (cSCC) and
              other skin cancers.
            Diagnosis
            Clinical ± punch biopsy if invasive lesion suspected.
            Treatment
            •	None.
            • Sunscreen and avoidance of UV.
            • Cryotherapy.
            •	Topical: diclofenac gel/​5-​fluorouracil (5-​FU) cream/​imiquimod (see
              % Basal cell carcinoma, p. 152).
            • Photodynamic therapy.
            • 5-​FU shown in meta-​analysis to be the most effective treatment for
              multiple actinic keratoses and can reduce incidence of progression to
              cSCC.1,2
            Lentigo maligna (Hutchinson’s melanotic freckle)
            • Common, pigmented, often large macule on head and neck (Fig. 3.1).
            •	Histologically, a proliferation of atypical melanocytes—​a melanoma
              in situ.
            • Risk of progression to invasive lentigo maligna melanoma unknown.
            • Biopsy may be indicated (of darker or changing areas).




            Fig. 3.1 Lentigo maligna.
                                                        Premalignant skin lesions                          149


•	Treatment:
  • none in very elderly?;
  • surgical excision with 5mm margin is treatment of choice;
  • RT/​cryotherapy/​imiquimod—​in larger lesions.
•	No need to follow-​up surgically excised cases. Others should be
  reviewed for 3–​5 years.
Melanocytic intraepidermal neoplasia
• UK-​based histopathological term, not adopted worldwide.
• Melanocytic proliferation confined to epidermis.
•	Essentially melanoma in situ.
•	Treatment: excision with 5mm margin.
References
1.	Gupta, A.K., Paquet, M. (2013). Network meta-​analysis of the outcome ‘participant complete
   clearance’ in non-​immunosuppressed participants of eight interventions for actinic keratosis: a
   follow up on a Cochrane review. Br J Dermatol 169(2): 250–​9.
2. Weinstock, M.A., Thwin, S.S., Siegel, J.A., Marcolivio, K., Means, A.D., Leader, N.F., et al. (2018).
   Chemoprevention of basal and squamous cell carcinoma with a single course of fluorouracil 5%
   cream, a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Dermatol 154(2): 167–​74.
501



      150    Chapter 3     Surgical dermatology


            Skin cancer
            Common types
            • Basal cell carcinoma (rodent ulcer) (BCC).
            • Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (cSCC).
            • Cutaneous melanoma (cM).
            All types are increasing in incidence and related to sunlight exposure.
               There are 135,000 cases in England and Wales per annum, but registra-
            tion of BCC and cSCC (‘keratinocyte cancers’—​the new term for ‘non-​
            melanoma skin cancer’ (NMSC)) varies widely and thus is under-​reported.
            In Scotland in 2016, 8159 BCCs were registered along with 3387 cSCCs.
               Both NICE and the Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (SIGN)
            have published guidance on cSCC and melanoma, in recent years.
            Rarer types
            • Merkel cell carcinoma.
            • Cutaneous T-​cell lymphoma.
            •	Atypical fibroxanthoma/​pleomorphic dermal sarcoma.
            •	Kaposi’s sarcoma.
            • Secondary deposits, e.g. lung, breast.
            •	In the UK, NICE published guidance in 2006 (last updated in 2010),
              ‘Improving outcomes for people with skin tumours including melanoma’
              (Cancer service guideline 8), which outlined how healthcare services for
              skin cancer patients should be organized, with emphasis on MDTs caring
              for patients with high-​risk tumours.
            • SIGN has published guidance on cSCC (SIGN 140) and melanoma
              (SIGN 146) in recent years.
            • Updated cross speciality guidance was published in May 2016 (Journal of
              Laryngology & Otology, 130, Supplement 2).
            • Skin cancer is a fast-​moving field, particularly in the field of melanoma,
              and many current guidelines are out of date.
Skin cancer   151
521



      152    Chapter 3     Surgical dermatology


            Basal cell carcinoma
            Background
            • Commonest human cancer.
            •	Increasing incidence that may soon be higher than all other cancers
              combined.
            • >80% of skin tumours, and >80% on the head and neck.
            • Slowly growing, locally invasive, and destructive, often pearly with
              telangiectasia.
            •	On the face, local invasion and destruction may morbidly affect function
              and aesthetics
            Risk factors
            • Chronic UV radiation.
            •	Genetic predisposition/​fair skin type.
            • Male sex.
            •	Immunosuppression—​post transplant, haematological malignancy, anti-​
              tumour necrosis factor (TNF) drugs (e.g. infliximab).
            •	Exposure to arsenic (rare).
            •	Gorlin–​Goltz syndrome (see % Gorlin–​Golz syndrome, p. 431).
            • Xeroderma pigmentosum.
            Diagnosis
            • Usually clinical, skin ‘stretch’ test and use of dermatoscope.
            •	Incisional/​punch biopsy may be of value in cases of doubt.
            •	Extensive lesions: CT or MRI to determine bone or major structure
              involvement.
            Morphological types
            • Cystic.
            •	Nodular.
            • Morphoeic (sclerosing).
            • Superficial.
            • Combinations of the types, e.g. nodulocystic (Fig. 3.2).
            These can all have keratotic, ulcerated, and pigmented variants.




            Fig. 3.2 Nodulocystic BCC.
                                                Basal cell carcinoma             153


Histological subtypes: less aggressive
•	Nodular.
• Superficial (multicentric).
Histological subtypes: more aggressive
• Morphoeic.
•	Infiltrative.
• Micronodular.
• Basosquamous.
These types may show the most aggressive features of perineural and
lymphovascular invasion.
High-​risk factors for basal cell carcinomas
• Site: midface/​ canthus.
• Size: >20mm (10mm on the central face).
•	Histology: perineural invasion and lymphovascular invasion.
• Recurrent tumour.
Treatment options
•	None: e.g. in the elderly or the medically compromised.
• Surgical: excision or destruction.
•	Non-​surgical.
Surgical treatment of basal cell carcinomas
Excision with predetermined margins
Recommended treatment by the British Association of Dermatologists
(BAD):
•	In nodular BCC:
  • 3mm margin will give tumour clearance in 85% of cases;
  • 4–​5mm margin gives clearance in 95% of cases.
•	In primary morphoeic BCC:
  • 3mm margin gives clearance in 66%;
  • 5mm—​82%;
  • 13mm—​95%.
•	Incomplete excision rates of BCC reported as 4–​7%, and as high as 40%
  at medial canthus in general practitioner series.
•	The Royal College of Pathologists’ classification of histological margins in
  keratinocyte cancers is:
  •	Involved.
  • Close—​<1mm.
  • Clear—​≥1mm.

Re-​excision
Recommended in:
• Midface/​critical site.
•	Aggressive histology.
• Deep margin involvement.
• Recurrent tumour.
541



      154    Chapter 3     Surgical dermatology


                                                            2.


                                                                  3.

                                       4.




            Fig. 3.3 Mohs surgery.

            Mohs micrographic surgery
            •	Aims to identify and remove all tumour by histologically guided re-​
              excision before reconstruction (Fig. 3.3).
            •	Labour intensive and limited availability.
            •	LA procedure.
            •	High rates of cure reported but no RCTs show lower recurrence rates
              than standard surgical excision in primary BCC.
            • Consider in:
              • recurrent BCC disease (recurrence rates are lower);
              • other high-​risk tumours where risk of recurrence is high;
              • where minimal tissue loss desired, e.g. anatomically sensitive areas
                such as periorbital tissues.
            •	Also has a role to play in the management of some other malignant skin
              tumours, e.g. high-​risk cSCC/​dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans.
            • Specialist skin cancer MDT discussion should precede referral for Mohs.
            • Variations include:
              • standard excision and intraoperative frozen section (false-​positive and
                false-​negative rates are high and this is not recommended);
              • standard excision, wait for haematoxylin and eosin (H&E) result, and
                delay reconstruction until clear margins are confirmed.
            Destructive surgical techniques
            Not recommended in high-​risk tumours:
            • Curettage and cautery: common treatment by dermatologists.
            • Cryosurgery.
            •	Laser.
            •	Higher recurrence rates than with surgical excision.
            Non-​surgical treatment of basal cell carcinoma
            Not recommended in forms of BCC other than superficial:
            Imiquimod
            •	An immune modulator that stimulates T cells (used in treatment of
              genital warts).
            • 80% cure rate in primary small superficial BCC, used five times per
              week for 6 weeks.
            Photodynamic therapy
            •	Topical methyl aminolevulinate (MAL) greater clearance than
              aminolevulinic acid (ALA).
            • Similar cure rate to imiquimod in superficial BCC.
                                                Basal cell carcinoma              155


Radiotherapy
•	Treatment of choice where the patient is unwilling or unable to tolerate
  surgery and treatment is desirable.
• Usually superficial electrons.
• Can be:
  • single fraction (higher complications);
  • fractionated (commonly 5 doses)—​higher cure rate with lower
    complications.
• Complications:
  • soft tissue radionecrosis, including underlying cartilage/​bone;
  • cataracts;
  • up to 5% telangiectasia;
  • secondary RT-​induced cancers.
•	Higher recurrence than with surgical excision (up to 10% vs 2%).
Advanced/​metastatic BCC
• Metastatic BCC vanishingly rare.
•	No standard therapy for this group; clinical trials appropriate if available.
• BCCs often exhibit activation of the Hedgehog/​PTCH1-​signalling
  pathway.
• Use of oral/​topical hedgehog pathway inhibitors (e.g. vismodegib)
  has been shown to be effective in patients with advanced, multiple, or
  metastatic BCC, although NHS funding for this drug in parts of the UK
  is no longer available (it is still available in Scotland).
Follow-​up of basal cell carcinoma
• Risk of a second BCC is 33–​77%.
•	Those with completely excised first BCC can be discharged with
  information.
•	Those with more than two BCCs have a 70% chance of a further BCC.
  Consider surveillance by a general practitioner or dermatologist.
561



      156    Chapter 3      Surgical dermatology


            Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma
            Background
            • >10% of skin cancers (second commonest).
            • 80% involve the head and neck.
            •	Locally invasive.
            • 5% of all cSCCs metastasize.
            • Up to 30% of high-​risk head and neck cSCCs metastasize.
            Risk factors
            • Chronic UV radiation.
            •	Genetic predisposition/​fair skin type.
            • Male sex.
            •	Immunosuppression (as per BCC).
            • Xeroderma pigmentosum, albinism.
            •	Exposure to arsenic (rare).
            • May arise in chronic wounds, scars, burns, sinus tracts.
            • Can follow Bowen’s disease, actinic keratosis.
            Presentation
            • Ulcer, nodule, or keratin horn; often rapidly growing.
            • Diagnosis: clinical/​histological.
            High-​risk cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma
            For recurrence or metastasis:
            • Site: lip, ear, non-​sun exposed sites, those arising in chronic wounds,
              after RT, and from Bowen’s disease.
            • Size: >2cm.
            • Depth: >4mm.
            • Histology: poorly differentiated, perineural infiltration in a significant
              nerve, invasion into fat or deeper.
            • Immunosuppression.
            • Recurrent tumour.
            Staging of cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma
            • Continues to evolve.
            •	The UICC and AJCC have both recently updated their guidance (see
              % Further reading, p. 175).
            •	The Royal College of Pathologists has adopted UICC skin cancer staging.
            •	Aiming to achieve parity with mucosal SCC TNM staging system.
            •	Incorporates primary tumour risk factors into T stage, mainly size related.
            • Upstaging with depth of invasion >6mm or perineural invasion in a
              named nerve or nerve >0.1mm from pT1 and pT2 to pT3.
            •	Nodal staging now takes into account number and size of nodal disease,
              as well as extranodal extension.
            •	Nodal burden has been shown to decrease overall survival.
            The role of sentinel node biopsy
            • Sentinel lymph node biopsy offers another means for identifying lymph
              node metastases in clinically negative nodal basins.
            •	Its utility in cSCC is yet unknown, due to a lack of controlled trials.
                           Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma                      157


•	It provides a minimally invasive staging procedure that may have a role in
  high-​risk cSCC patients.
Primary tumour treatment
• Surgical excision: treatment of choice:
  • low-​risk, well-​defined tumours: margin of 4mm gives clearance in 95%;
  • high-​risk tumours: margin of 6mm or more (including SCC of the lip);
  • high-​risk lesions may recur as in-​transit metastases in surrounding skin;
  • consider Mohs surgery in high-​risk tumours and recurrence.
• Curettage and cautery or cryosurgery: may be appropriate for low-​
  risk, well-​defined tumours, by experienced practitioners.
• RT: treatment of choice where the patient is unwilling or unable to
  tolerate surgery, and in unresectable disease.
• Anti-​epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), cetuximab: targeted
  treatment for cSCC, can be added to RT for unresectable cSCC.
• PD-​1 inhibitor, cemiplimab: systemic treatment of cSCC in metastatic
  or advanced cases where not suitable for surgery or RT.
• Re-​excision: recommended in incomplete or close excisions, especially
  in high-​risk tumours.
• Adjuvant RT: where re-​excision not desirable, or where other high-​risk
  factors are also present.
• Adjuvant RT: should be considered where perineural invasion is present.
The neck/​parotid
•	No role for imaging in the clinically N0 patient.
•	No evidence for elective lymph node dissection (ELND) in N0.
•	Enlarged nodes should have FNA.
• Regional lymph node dissection in node-​positive disease.
•	Extra caution should be paid to the extrajugular node, facial, occipital,
  and retroauricular nodes.
•	A more selective approach may be suitable depending on the position
  of the primary.
• Postoperative regional nodal adjuvant RT—​recommended for >N1
  disease or extracapsular spread.
The parotid
•	The parotid lymph nodes are the most common site for drainage in
  cSCCs that metastasize, as the scalp is a common site for cSCC and the
  first echelon nodes are commonly found in the parotid.
• Superficial parotid nodes most commonly involved, therefore superficial
  parotidectomy is indicated in P+ disease.
•	If P+, occult neck disease may be present in 10–​35%, therefore ELND
  of usually levels 1–​3 is recommended.
Follow-​up
• 75% of recurrence/​metastasis occurs within 2 years in high-​risk tumours.
• BAD recommends follow-​up of those with high-​risk tumours for at least
  2 and up to 5 years.
• SIGN recommends follow-​up of high-​risk cSCC for 3 years.
•	New BAD BCC and cSCC guidelines are due to be published in 2020.
581



      158    Chapter 3     Surgical dermatology

            Keratoacanthoma
            (See Fig. 3.4.)
            • Common, rapidly growing skin tumour.
            • Resembles cSCC clinically.
            •	True keratoacanthoma exists where no histological evidence of invasion.
            • Central keratin plug.
            • Spontaneously involutes.
            • Differentiation from cSCC can be difficult clinically (Fig. 3.5).
            •	Treat as cSCC.




            Fig. 3.4 Keratoacanthoma.
                            Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma                   159




Fig. 3.5 cSCC on superior aspect of pinna on background of actinic keratosis.
601



      160    Chapter 3     Surgical dermatology


            Cutaneous melanoma
            Background
            •	A malignant tumour of neural crest-​derived cutaneous melanocytes.
            • <10% of skin cancers (third most common).
            • Can arise de novo, 30–​50% arise from pre-​existing naevi.
            • Commonest sites are lower legs in women and the back in men.
            • 75% of skin cancer deaths due to cM.
            •	Increasing incidence, but death due to cM rising more slowly due to
              detection at an earlier stage.
            Risk factors
            • Sunburn in childhood.
            • Skin types—​red hair, freckles.
            •	Immunosuppression including anti-​TNF drugs (2× incidence).
            • >100 moles.
            •	Lentigo maligna.
            • Previous primary melanoma (5% develop second primary).
            • Previous keratinocyte cancer.
            • Family history (melanoma or pancreatic cancer).
            • FAMMM syndrome—​familial atypical multiple mole melanoma
              syndrome.
            •	Giant congenital pigmented hairy naevus.
            •	Genetic mutations: CDKN2A gene mutations (10–​20%).
            • Xeroderma pigmentosum.
            Diagnosis/​clinical features
            Glasgow criteria
            • Major features: change in size, colour, irregular shape, irregular colour.
            • Minor features: largest diameter >7mm, inflammation, oozing, change in
              sensation.
            •	Lesions with any one major feature or three minor features are
              suspicious of melanoma.
            • ABCDE checklist is a good aide-​memoire:
              • Asymmetry;
              • Border irregularity;
              • Colour variation;
              • Diameter >6mm;
              • Evolving/​Elevated.
            • Dermoscopy increases diagnostic accuracy.
            Histological subtypes
            • Superficial spreading: most common (Fig. 3.6).
            •	Nodular: early vertical growth phase.
            •	Lentigo maligna melanoma: invasion within a lentigo maligna, most
              common on face (Fig. 3.7).
            •	Acral lentiginous: arise on the soles/​palms and subungual (under the nails).
            • (Choroidal and mucosal melanomas are non-​cutaneous and not
              discussed here.)
            •	Naevoid melanoma, difficult histological diagnosis.
                                                Cutaneous melanoma              161


• Desmoplastic/​neurotropic: rare, deeply infiltrating, fibrous, non-​
  pigmented, sun-​exposed sites, elderly patients, tends to recur locally. If
  purely desmoplastic, very unlikely to metastasize.




Fig. 3.6 Superficial spreading melanoma.




Fig. 3.7 Lentigo maligna melanoma.
621



      162    Chapter 3       Surgical dermatology

            Management
            •	Lesions that may represent a melanoma can be excisionally biopsied
              and directly closed with a margin of 2mm clinical margin and a cuff of
              underlying fat.
            •	If unable to excise without reconstruction, a full-​thickness 2–​4mm
              punch/​incisional biopsy should be performed from within the lesion
              (most elevated area or dermoscopically most abnormal) to differentiate
              lentigo simplex, lentigo maligna, and malignant melanoma.
            • Reconstruction should not be attempted if there is suspicion
              of melanoma as this may jeopardize future melanoma surgical
              management/​SNB (see later in topic).
            •	A full-​thickness representative biopsy:
              • gives the diagnosis;
              • determines depth of the lesion and thus the margin for subsequent
                 wide local excision;
              • aids staging.
            •	All melanoma patients should be referred to a specialist skin cancer
              MDT from local services where the full range of melanoma specialists
              can discuss and agree upon the management plan.
            Breslow thickness
            Depth of a melanoma in millimetres measured from the top of the granular
            layer of epidermis (or base of ulcer if ulcerated) to the deepest point of
            invasion. Correlates strongly with the risk of in-​transit micrometastases, as
            well as nodal and metastatic disease, and thus survival.
            Other important histopathological features
            • Ulceration.
            • Mitotic index.
            •	Lymphovascular invasion and angiotropism.
            • Satellite/​microsatellite/​in-​transit metastases.
            • Perineural invasion/​neurotropism.
            •	Growth phase (radial or vertical).
            •	Tumour-​infiltrating lymphocytes and regression.
            • Margins achieved from invasive and in situ components.
            Staging
            The most recent 8th editions of the AJCC (2017)/​UICC (2016) staging
            systems for melanoma are complex, but TNM based, similar to many other
            cancers. It continues to evolve under the guidance of the melanoma staging
            committee, and is based mainly on data from North America, Australia,
            and Europe. It can be found online at M https://​www.cancer.org/​cancer/​
            melanoma-​ s kin-​ c ancer/​ d etection-​ d iagnosis-​ s taging/​ m elanoma-​ s kin-​
            cancer-​stages.html
            Management
            Wide local excision
            This is the secondary excision of a post-​excision scar to reduce the risk
            of local recurrence and metastasis due to the presence of in-​      transit
            micrometastases in the skin surrounding a melanoma. It is carried out after
            histological confirmation of a melanoma and is determined by the reported
            Breslow thickness.
                                              Cutaneous melanoma               163


2010 BAD guidelines for wide local excision
• Breslow thickness <1mm: excise scar with margin of 1cm; cM <0.75mm
   depth, a narrower excision may be sufficient (5-​year survival 95–​100%).
• Breslow thickness 1–​2mm: excise with margin of 1–​2cm (5-​year survival
   95–​100%).
• Breslow thickness 2.1–​4mm: excise with margin of 2–​3cm (5-​year
   survival 80–​96%).
• Breslow thickness >4mm: excise with margin of 2–​3cm (5-​year
   survival 50%).
The quoted survival figures predate the new advent of systemic targeted
therapy and immunotherapy.
   The histological margin of clearance of the primary excision can be taken
into account when carrying out wide local excision.
The role of sentinel node biopsy
•	This is a surgical technique to examine the first draining lymph node(s)
  from a primary cM site. As per NICE guidance, patients should be
  informed of technique advantages and disadvantages and given a choice.
• Advantages: offers prognostic information, importantly can upstage a
  patient earlier to guide new adjuvant treatments such as immunotherapy
  or targeted therapy if the tumour is BRAF mutated. A positive SNB
  result means a patient becomes stage III and eligible for systemic
  treatment; a negative SNB result can predict 10-​year survival of 90%.
• Disadvantages: requires GA, additional morbidity, additional demands on
  nuclear medicine and pathology services, 3% false-​negative rate (NICE).
• Indication: NICE guidance is to discuss/​offer SNB to patients with pT1b
  to pT4b, i.e. stage IB–​IIC cM. Following new UICC/​AJCC staging, pT1b
  tumours have a Breslow thickness ≥0.8mm to 1mm without ulceration,
  or <1mm but with ulceration.
• Completion lymph node dissection is no longer routinely indicated for
  positive SNB as no overall survival benefit has been shown in the largest
  trial to examine this (MSLT II) and adjuvant systemic options continue
  to increase. May still be indicated in select cases (particularly H&N and
  i nodal burden/​extracapsular spread) and should be discussed with the
  specialist skin cancer MDT.
• See Fig. 3.8.
Metastatic disease
•	No role for routine imaging in the asymptomatic clinically N0 M0 cM
  patient. BAD suggests considering in high-​risk primary cM, defined by
  BAD as stage IIB, or IIC, i.e. >2mm with ulceration (pT3b) or >4mm
  without ulceration (pT4a) or with ulceration (pT4b).
•	NICE recommends systemic imaging at stage IIC.
• Systemic imaging should be performed for suspected or established
  stage III or IV disease.
• Body PET-​CT or CT chest, abdomen, and pelvis, and MRI with contrast
  brain scanning are imaging modalities of choice. The brain should always
  be imaged.
•	No role for ELND for N0 cases.
641



      164    Chapter 3       Surgical dermatology




            Fig. 3.8 Blue dye in an afferent lymphatic.

            • Patients at intermediate or high risk of recurrent disease, i.e. stage IIIB
              (or stage IIIA with a macroscopic sentinel node) and above, should have
              the following staging investigations:
              • CT scan (with contrast) of brain, chest, abdomen, and pelvis;
              • lactate dehydrogenase (a marker of disease burden);
              • FNA of suspicious nodes ± open biopsy if FNA negative.
            •	Established nodal disease (stage III) should be discussed with the
              specialist skin cancer MDT and there is still a role for lymph node
              dissection, although this is increasingly likely to be combined with
              systemic therapy. There are likely to be both adjuvant roles and even
              neoadjuvant roles for surgery for stage III disease.
            • Distant metastatic disease (stage IV) is usually managed by oncology-​led
              systemic therapy, but there is some role for surgery in adjuvant settings
              for localized metastatic disease.
            The role of systemic therapy
            •	There have been huge advances in oncological treatments for advanced
              melanoma following the publication of several large RCTs demonstrating
              survival benefit since the last edition of this book.
            •	The main two approaches with this are to utilize the immune system
              to attack melanoma (immunotherapy), and to block targeted gene
              mutations in melanoma tumours (anti-​BRAF, anti-​MEK).
            •	Targeted therapy—​targets specific melanoma tumour mutations
              such as in the BRAF gene (present in 50% of melanomas) and further
              downstream in the MAPK pathway, MEK.
            • Combined BRAF and MEK inhibition has shown very good responses
              and survival (e.g. dabrafenib + trametinib or more recently NICE
              approved, binimetinib + encorafenib).
                                             Cutaneous melanoma              165


• Systemic therapy is currently licensed in the adjuvant setting for
  resected stage III disease and for the management of stage IV disease or
  inoperable stage III disease.
•	Immunotherapy can be single or dual agent (e.g. ipilimumab (anti-​CTLA-​
  4), nivolumab, pembrolizumab (anti-​PD-​1)).
•	Immunotherapy has provided good evidence of remission and long-​term
  survival when compared with chemotherapy.
•	The problem is toxicity, especially autoimmune disease.
•	Local immunotherapies:
  •	T-​VEC: herpes simplex virus injected directly into tumours to
    stimulate the immune system. Live virus—​can give patients a flu-​like
    complex.
  •	Imiquimod: can be used successfully in combination with RT and/​or
    systemic treatment.
• Systemic therapy for melanoma is likely to continue evolving rapidly as
  new trials emerge.
Follow-​up of those with undetectable disease/​apparent cure
•	All patients with invasive melanoma should be monitored 3-​monthly for
  1 year.
•	Thereafter, patients with stage Ia melanoma may be discharged from
  routine care.
•	Other patients should be followed up for a further 2 years at 3-​monthly
  intervals, and 2 further years at 6-​monthly intervals.
•	Those with resected nodal or distant metastases can be further
  followed annually from 5–​10 years.
• Follow-​up should include clinical examination from an oncological or
  surgical point of view, general dermatological body skin checks.
• Melanoma Focus (2013, M https://​melanomafocus.com/​)
  recommends surveillance imaging in high-​risk cM (stage IIC or higher),
  6-​monthly for 3 years, then annually until year 5).
• Vitamin D levels should be established at diagnosis and monitored with
  supplementation if required to keep within the normal range. Vitamin D
  deficiency has been associated with poorer prognosis in melanoma.
61



     166    Chapter 3      Surgical dermatology


           Rare skin cancers
           Merkel cell carcinoma
           (See Fig. 3.9.)
           •	Arises from neuroendocrine cells in skin.
           •	Now thought to be caused by Merkel cell polyomavirus in 80%.
           • Presents as painless nodule, which ulcerates in later stages.
           •	Now has specific AJCC/​UICC staging.
           • Mortality >40% at 5 years.
           • Wide local excision (after biopsy or excision) with margins up to 2cm,
             and SNB. Adjuvant RT is indicated to the primary site and nodal basin.
           • Primary RT may be used.
           • Chemotherapy for systemic disease.
           •	Avelumab (immunotherapy) is licensed in the UK for metastatic or
             inoperable Merkel cell carcinoma.
           Atypical fibroxanthoma/​pleomorphic dermal sarcoma
           • Rare mesenchymal tissue tumour.
           •	Often presents on the scalp as rapidly growing purple/​red nodule.
           •	Histologically, atypical fibroxanthoma and pleomorphic dermal sarcoma
             are similar and thought to be on same spectrum, but pleomorphic
             dermal sarcoma is more invasive and aggressive with up to 20%
             metastatic risk and high rates of local recurrence.
           •	Treatment is surgical excision with up to 2cm margin for biopsy-​proven
             pleomorphic dermal sarcoma.




           Fig. 3.9 Merkel cell carcinoma.
                                                    Rare skin cancers        167


•	Adjuvant RT may be indicated to the primary site and nodal basin.
• Primary RT may be used.
• Follow-​up as per specialist skin cancer MDT discussion–​–​long term for
  PDS due to high recurrence rate and metastatic risk.
Cutaneous T-​cell lymphoma
• Rare in head and neck.
•	Low-​grade non-​Hodgkin lymphoma includes mycosis fungoides and
  Sézary syndrome.
•	Treatment: psoralen and ultra-​violet A (PUVA)/​photodynamic therapy.
• RT/​chemotherapy in a specialist centre.
681



      168       Chapter 3    Surgical dermatology


            Reconstructive options
            Following surgical excision of a skin tumour:
            •	None—​healing by secondary intention.
            • Direct/​primary closure.
            • Skin graft.
            •	Local flap.
            •	Other flaps—​distant/​free.
            Healing by secondary intention
            •   Slow, risk of infection, intensive wound care may be needed.
            •   Useful in frail/​elderly.
            •   Successful at medial canthus, concave wounds.
            •   Beware of consequences of contracture, e.g. ectropion.
            Direct closure
            •	Elliptical excision in relaxed skin tension lines (RSTLs).
            • Direct closure of a circular defect ± excision of dog ears. Gives
              a shorter scar than a classical ellipse and works well in younger,
              thicker skin.
            • Closure may be against RSTLs to avoid anatomical distortion, e.g.
              vertically in periorbital area.
            Skin graft
            •	Transfer of a devascularized piece of skin to a recipient wound bed
              where neovascularization takes place.
            •	Types:
              • full thickness (Wolfe/​full-​thickness skin graft (FTSG));
              • split skin (Fig. 3.10).




            Fig. 3.10 FTSG (smaller area) and split-​skin graft.
                                              Reconstructive options                169


FTSG donor sites for the head and neck
• Preauricular.
• Supraclavicular.
• Upper eyelid.
• Postauricular.
•	Nasolabial.
Split-​skin graft
• Upper arm and thigh commonest sites.
• Meshing increases coverage.
•	No evidence that meshing or perforations improve ‘take rate’.
FTSG vs split-​skin graft
•	Less donor site morbidity.
• Better aesthetics.
•	Less secondary contracture.
• More robust skin.
•	Less skin available as donor site needs to be directly closed.
•	Lower ‘take rate’ as skin is thicker.
Graft take relies on
• Plasmatic imbibition for 24–​36h.
•	In-​growth of capillaries, then lymphatic vessels, later of nerves.
Graft take reduced by
• Mobility (shearing forces).
•	Haematoma under graft.
•	Infection (Streptococcus pyogenes, Pseudomonas spp.).
Graft take improved by
•	Good surgical technique: handling, minimal use of diathermy.
•	Elimination of potential dead space, ‘quilting’
• Vacuum dressings.
• Platelet-​rich plasma?
Management of split-​skin graft donor site options
• Bupivacaine for analgesia.
• Paraffin gauze.
• Mepitel®.
•	Alginate (Kaltostat® dressing).
• Vacuum dressings.
• Moist healing, OpSite® dressings.
• Platelet-​rich plasma.
Donor site dressings should be left for 10–​14 days.
Local flap
A flap is the transfer of vascularized tissue. A local flap includes the margin
of the primary defect as one of its edges. Its design imports tissue from an
area of local laxity to fill the primary defect and usually allows direct closure
of the secondary defect.
  Classified by:
• Composition (e.g. cutaneous).
701



      170    Chapter 3      Surgical dermatology

            • Blood supply (random pattern vs axial).
            •	Type of movement:
               • advancement (Fig. 3.11 and Fig. 3.12);
               • rotation (Fig. 3.13 and Fig. 3.14);
               • transposition (one bit of skin crosses over another) (Fig. 3.15).
            •	Geometric shape of flap, e.g. rhombic, rhomboid (like a rhombus),
               bilobed, hatchet.
            Other terminology includes interpolation flap (where a distant pedicled flap
            bridges normal tissue and is divided after 3 weeks), e.g. some nasolabial
            flaps, and the forehead flap to reconstruct the nose.
            Skin graft vs local flap
            •	Grafting is easier if the surgeon is less experienced.
            •	Aesthetics of grafting are often worse: contour defects, colour match,
              graft failure, and contracture.
            • Flaps can cover bare bone/​tendons/​cartilage (non-​graftable sites).
            • Surveillance for recurrent tumour may be superior if grafted (but there
              are no studies to show this).
            Distant or free flaps
            May be required for large reconstructions.




            Fig. 3.11 Local advancement flap.




            Fig. 3.12 Local advancement flap.
                                           Reconstructive options       171




Fig. 3.13 Local rotation flap.




Fig. 3.14 Local rotation flap.

Tissue expansion
• Useful in the scalp—​insertion is subgaleal.
•	Osmotic expanders remove the need for a port and injection.
• Careful planning is required to avoid complications of infection,
  dehiscence, and insufficient tissue production to cover the defect.
721



      172    Chapter 3       Surgical dermatology




            Fig. 3.15 Transposition flap with interpolation.

            Dermal template
            •	Integra® dermal regeneration template has been used for burn
              reconstruction with great success.
            •	It has two layers—​an outer silicone layer to protect wounds from
              infection and control heat/​moisture and a porous inner layer functioning
              as a scaffold for regenerating functioning dermis. Once dermis has
              regenerated, the silicone layer is removed and an epidermal split skin
              graft is placed, though it can be left to epithelialize with time.
            • May be useful as an adjunct to other techniques when large
              defects exist.
Reconstructive options   173
741



      174    Chapter 3      Surgical dermatology


            Complications
            Early
            •	Infection.
            • Bleeding.
            • Bruising.
            •	Graft failure/​flap failure (manuka honey dressings are useful).
            • Flap failure relates to design. Tension is more important than
              length-​to-​width ratio.
            Late
            • Scar: hypertrophic scarring remains within the limits of the scar, keloid
              scarring extends beyond (Fig. 3.16).
            •	Tissue contraction distorting facial features, e.g. lip snarl, ectropion
              (Fig. 3.17).
            • Recurrence of tumour.




            Fig. 3.16 Keloid scarring on pinna.
                                                                             Complications                  175




Fig. 3.17 Contracture following flap necrosis.

Further reading
Amin, M.B., Edge, S.B., Greene, F.L., Gershenwald, J.E., Brookland, R.K., Meyer, L., et al. (eds) (2017).
   AJCC cancer staging manual, 8th edn. Springer, New York.
Brierley, J.D., Gospodarowicz, M.K., Wittekind, C. (eds) (2016). TNM classification of malignant tu-
   mours, 8th edn. Wiley-​Blackwell, Oxford.

Online resources
American Joint Committee on Cancer: M http://​www.cancerstaging.org
British Association of Dermatologists’ management guidelines: M http://​www.bad.org.uk/​
   healthcare-​professionals/​clinical-​standards/​clinical-​guidelines
NICE (2010, updated 2010). Skin tumours including melanoma: improving outcomes for people with
   skin tumours including melanoma. M https://​www.nice.org.uk/​guidance/​csg8
SIGN. Clinical guidelines. M http://​www.sign.ac.uk/​guidelines/​published/​index.html
761
 Chapter 4                               177



Salivary glands
Introduction 178
Relevant anatomy 180
Physiology 182
History 183
Clinical examination 184
Investigations 186
Xerostomia 188
Sjögren’s syndrome 190
Diffuse gland swelling 192
Localized gland swelling 196
Sialolithiasis 204
Ranula 206
Disorders of minor salivary glands 208
781



      178    Chapter 4     Salivary glands


            Introduction
            There are three main pairs of major salivary glands in the head and neck,
            namely the parotid, submandibular, and sublingual salivary glands. In add-
            ition to these major glands there are numerous minor salivary glands dis-
            tributed throughout the oral cavity. These minor salivary glands are situated
            in the adnexal layer of the oral mucosa.
Introduction   179
801



      180    Chapter 4     Salivary glands


            Relevant anatomy
            Parotid gland
            •	This lies in a tight fascial envelope formed by the deep investing layer of
              cervical fascia that splits to enclose the gland.
            • It is composed of a superficial and a deep lobe. The latter contributes
              only one-​fifth of the total volume of the gland and is separated from the
              superficial lobe by the plane of the facial nerve as it traverses the gland.
            •	The facial nerve is the most notable anatomical structure within
              the parotid gland. The nerve enters the gland soon after leaving the
              stylomastoid foramen at the skull base. Within the gland the nerve has
              a short course as a single trunk before dividing into upper and lower
              divisions. These upper and lower divisions then further divide into the
              classic five terminal branches:
              • temporal;
              • zygomatic;
              • buccal;
              • marginal mandibular;
              • cervical.
            •	There is considerable overlap and cross-​innervation of the buccal
              branch.
            •	The parotid gland also contains lymph nodes which are the first echelon
              nodes for part of the scalp and ear.
            •	The parotid duct exits the anterior part of the gland and is closely
              associated with the buccal branch of the facial nerve:
              • anatomical surface landmark—​middle third of a line drawn from the
                 intertragal notch of the ear to the midpoint between the upper lip
                 and alar base;
              • lies ~1.5cm below the zygomatic arch;
              • is 4–​6cm in length;
              • perforates the buccinator muscle to enter the mouth at the papilla,
                 which lies opposite the second molar tooth;
              • is of smaller calibre than the submandibular duct.
            •	The gland receives:
              • parasympathetic secretomotor fibres from the inferior salivatory
                 nucleus via the otic ganglion and auriculotemporal nerve;
              • sympathetic supply from the terminal branches of the external carotid
                 artery.
            Submandibular gland
            •	This lies in the submandibular triangle of the neck surrounded by a
              capsule derived from the deep cervical fascia.
            •	The triangle is formed by the anterior and posterior bellies of digastric
              muscle, and lower border of the mandible.
            •	The submandibular triangle also contains a number of extracapsular
              lymph nodes, but in contrast to the parotid gland there are no lymph
              nodes within the gland itself.
                                                  Relevant anatomy            181


•	There are no major nerves within the submandibular gland although:
  • the lingual nerve is closely associated with the submandibular duct;
  • the hypoglossal nerve lies medial to the gland;
  • the marginal mandibular branch of the facial nerve is superficial to
    the gland and is separated from it by the thick layer of deep investing
    cervical fascia.
•	The submandibular duct exits from the superior surface of the gland
  deep to the mandible. As it exits the gland, it curves around the
  mylohyoid muscle to enter the floor of the mouth; it travels anteriorly,
  crossing over the lingual nerve and the sublingual gland to open in the
  anterior floor of the mouth behind the lower incisor teeth.
•	The gland receives:
  • parasympathetic secretomotor fibres from superior salivatory nucleus
    via the chorda tympani and lingual nerve;
  • sympathetic supply from branches of the external carotid artery.

Sublingual gland
•	This lies in the floor of the mouth either side of the tongue.
• It is located in the sublingual space, bounded by the:
  • mandible laterally;
  • genioglossus muscle medially;
  • mylohyoid muscle inferiorly;
  • mucosa of the floor of the mouth superiorly.
•	There is no surrounding capsule.
• It drains directly into the floor of the mouth through multiple (8–​20)
  ducts of Rivinus. A major sublingual duct (of Bartholin) can be present
  as an anatomical variant.
821



      182       Chapter 4   Salivary glands


            Physiology
            • 1–​1.5L of saliva is secreted per day.
            • Resting salivary flow rate is ~0.25mL/​min.
            • Stimulated salivary flow rate is ~1mL/​min.
            • Resting salivary flow is secreted from the glands in the following
              proportions:
              • parotid—​20%;
              • submandibular—​75%;
              • sublingual—​5%.
            •	The glands vary in their proportion of mucinous/​serous secretion:
              • parotid—​serous;
              • submandibular—​mixed (10% mucinous);
              • sublingual—​mixed (10% serous).
                                                                   History        183


History
History of a lump
• How long has the lump been present? The majority of salivary tumours
  are benign and slow growing.
• Does the lump ever get smaller? The majority of salivary tumours slowly
  enlarge.
‘Meal-​time’ syndrome
Patients with obstructive salivary gland pathology usually exhibit so-​called
meal-​time syndrome. They have few or no problems other than when
eating. On eating, salivary gland flow increases causing the gland to enlarge
as a result of distal obstruction. Pain results from capsular distension. These
symptoms occur as soon as the salivary flow rate is stimulated—​to the
patient this means immediate pain and swelling on the first sight or taste
of food.
841



      184    Chapter 4     Salivary glands


            Clinical examination
            Parotid
            Inspection
            • Is there parotid swelling?
               • unilateral?
               • bilateral?
            •	Are there any skin changes over the parotid gland? If seen unilaterally
               this may indicate infection or malignancy.
            •	Are there any potentially malignant cutaneous lesions on the ear
               or scalp?
            • Is there any facial nerve weakness or altered sensation in the distribution
               of the greater auricular nerve (ear lobe)?—​sign of malignant tumour.
            • Is there a swelling in the oropharynx?—​sign of a deep lobe tumour.
            Palpation
            Always ask the patient first and check whether it is a painful lump:
            • Is there diffuse swelling of the parotid gland or is there a discrete lump?
            • Is the lump mobile?
            • What size is the lump?
            • Is it possible to express saliva from duct?
            • Is there any associated cervical lymphadenopathy?
            Submandibular/​sublingual
            Inspection
            • Is there any obvious swelling below the lower border of the mandible?
            • Is there abnormal tongue movement or sensation?
            • Is there any weakness of the marginal mandibular branch of the
               facial nerve?
            • Is there any swelling in the floor of the mouth?
            • Is there any other pathology that could be causing lymphadenopathy in
               the submandibular triangle?
            Palpation
            Bimanually palpate the submandibular gland, with one gloved finger in the
            mouth and a finger over the submandibular triangle. Compare one side to
            the other.
            • Is there a stone palpable in the submandibular duct?
            • If there is a swelling palpable in the submandibular triangle, is it:
              • bimanually palpable?—​suggestive of a submandibular gland swelling;
              • only palpable in the neck?—​more suggestive of enlarged
                 submandibular lymph node.
            • Is there submandibular versus sublingual swelling? Since the majority
              of the submandibular gland lies in the submandibular triangle, most of
              the swelling will be in the neck (Fig. 4.1). In contrast, swelling from a
              sublingual gland will appear exclusively in the mouth.
                                                  Clinical examination   185




Fig. 4. Submandibular salivary gland swelling.
861



      186    Chapter 4     Salivary glands


            Investigations
            • USS: can demonstrate tumours, lymph nodes, calculi (Fig. 4.2). The
              deep parotid lobe is difficult to visualize.
            • Plain films: may demonstrate calcified salivary stones.
            • Sialography: reveals duct obstruction, sialectasis, filling defects. Pre-​
              contrast, filling, and emptying phase films are taken. Contrast medium is
              Visipaque®/​Omnipaque® (iodine based).
            • MRI: can demonstrate tumours, nodes, calculi. Can be combined
              with ductal contrast to show obstructive disease. Modern techniques
              use magnetic resonance hydrography, where intraductal saliva acts
              as a contrast medium to visualize ductal anatomy. High-​resolution
              visualization of the facial nerve is debatable.
            • CT: as standard MRI. Cone beam CT sialography is available and limits
              radiation exposure compared to conventional CT.
            • FNA: with a 23G (blue) needle gives as much diagnostic information as
              a 21G (green) needle:
              • arguments against FNA—​no change in management as surgical
                 excision is treatment of choice, risk of seeding (theoretical);
              • arguments for FNA—​identification of benign versus malignant lump,
                 non-​surgical disease (e.g. sarcoidosis/​lymphoma), intraparotid
                 metastatic lymph node disease (e.g. from skin cancer).
            •	Needle core biopsy with a larger needle under USS is advocated by
              some—​higher diagnosis rates as architecture is preserved (see E Fine
              needle aspiration for cytology or biopsy, p. 75).
            • Scintigraphy:
              • radio-​isotopic study of salivary gland function undertaken by injecting
                 40MBq technetium pertechnetate intravenously and collecting a series
                 of images from a gamma camera;
              • during study salivary flow rate is stimulated with lemon juice;
              • results give an idea of total salivary function and are useful in
                 evaluation of patients with dry mouth;
              • can reveal Warthin’s tumour (rarely used).
            • Sialoendoscopy: technique in which an endoscope is passed down the
              parotid or submandibular duct with a view to diagnosing causes of duct
              obstruction. It is possible to therapeutically remove calculi or dilate
              strictures using minimally invasive techniques.
                                                              Investigations   187




Fig. 4.2 USS showing stone in hilum of submandibular gland.
81



     188    Chapter 4     Salivary glands


           Xerostomia
           Definition
           Subjective sensation of dry mouth (hyposalivation is the objective reduction
           in salivary flow). Not always associated with disease or a clinically apparent
           reduction in quantity or quality of saliva. More common in ♀ and elderly
           patients. Has following consequences:
           • Difficulty in chewing and swallowing (due to limited increase in salivary
              flow rate from resting levels).
           •	Erythematous and atrophic mucosa.
           • Lobulation and depapillation of the tongue.
           • Dental caries (this is most frequently seen around the cervical margins
              of teeth).
           •	Oral candidosis and angular cheilitis.
           Primary xerostomia: pathology of salivary glands
           • Iatrogenic:
             • irradiation of glands, including radioactive iodine;
             • chemotherapy.
           •	Autoimmune:
             • Sjögren’s syndrome (SS);
             • HIV.
           • Inflammatory:
             • sarcoid;
             • hepatitis C.
           • Cystic fibrosis.
           Secondary xerostomia: systemic disease
           • Drug-​induced xerostomia; most prevalent cause:
             • antihistamines;
             • antidepressants;
             • anticholinergics;
             • antihypertensives;
             • antipsychotics;
             • anti-​Parkinson agents;
             • diuretics.
           • Disorders leading to fluid/​electrolyte imbalance:
             • dehydration;
             • diarrhoea and vomiting;
             • diabetes;
             • congestive cardiac failure (CCF) and oedema.
           •	Neurological:
             • organic brain disease:
             • psychological—​mouth breathers.
           •	Anxiety.
           Management
           Options for management include drug dose reduction or use of alterna-
           tive medication with reduced anticholinergic activity. Consider modification
           of dosing schedule to allow maximum salivary flow at night (xerostomia is
           often worse at night). Avoidance of sublingual preparations of drug.
Xerostomia   189
901



      190    Chapter 4     Salivary glands


            Sjögren’s syndrome
            Definition
            Chronic multisystem autoimmune exocrinopathy.
            Epidemiology
            0.5–​2% population affected, ~90% ♀. Two peaks in onset: mid 30s and
            postmenopausal mid 50s.
            Cause
            Unknown—​   thought to be triggered by an environmental agent in a
            person with genetic predisposition (associated with HLA-​B8 and -​DR3).
            Characterized by lymphocytic infiltration of salivary and lacrimal glands and
            progressive glandular atrophy resulting in loss of function.
            Classification
            • Primary: affects salivary and lacrimal glands (= Sicca syndrome).
            • Secondary: 50–​60% of patients have another connective tissue or
              autoimmune disease, e.g.:
              • rheumatoid arthritis (15% also have SS);
              • systemic lupus erythematosus (30% have SS);
              • scleroderma;
              • polymyositis;
              • thyroiditis;
              • primary biliary cholangitis.

            Clinical
            • Persistent xerostomia and xerophthalmia >3 months.
            • Salivary and lacrimal gland enlargement—​if unilateral, consider B-​cell
              mucosa-​associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphoma as i incidence in
              SS (particularly Sicca syndrome).
            • Parotitis/​ascending infections.
            • Dry skin, nasal, and vaginal mucosa.
            • Signs of associated connective tissue disorder (CTD).
            Diagnosis
            • Subjective:
              • ocular symptoms;
              • oral symptoms.
            • Objective:
              • ocular signs: positive Schirmer test (<5mm/​5min) or positive Rose
                Bengal score (for corneal ulceration);
              • histopathological features: lower labial gland biopsy showing focal
                inflammatory cell infiltrate replacing acini;
              • salivary function testing: unstimulated total salivary flow rate <1.5mL
                in 15min (normal unstimulated flow is 0.3–​0.4mL/​min), positive
                salivary scintigraphy or sialography;
              • serum testing—​autoantibodies: presence of at least one of the
                following antibodies: Ro/​SS-​A or La/​SS-​B, antinuclear antibodies.
                                                 Sjögren’s syndrome            191


Primary SS must include four of the six criteria (including positive auto-
antibodies or histopathological features) or any three of the four objective
features.
   Secondary SS must include the presence of other CTDs plus one sub-
jective and two objective features (excluding serum testing features).
Management
• Saliva substitutes/​stimulation.
• Pilocarpine (muscarinic parasympathomimetic) if some residual
  functioning salivary tissue:
  • start very slowly and increase gently to avoid side effects;
  • side effects include i BP and pulse rate, gastrointestinal symptoms,
     and sweating.
• Patients should be treated in a multidisciplinary fashion with input from:
  • rheumatology;
  • ophthalmology;
  •	OMFS;
  • general dental practitioner.
•	Management of associated disease including low threshold for scanning/​
  biopsy if risk of lymphoma.
Mucosa-​associated lymphoid tissue (MALT lymphoma)
•	Most common non-​Hodgkin’s lymphoma.
• Strong association with SS.
• Clinically:
  • parotid gland enlargement;
  • splenomegaly;
  • purpura.
• Investigation:
  • bloods: hypergammaglobulinaemia;
  • labial/​parotid gland biopsy: germinal centre formation.
•	Treatment:
  • chemotherapy and low-​dose RT.
921



      192    Chapter 4     Salivary glands


            Diffuse gland swelling
            Swelling is a common symptom. It most frequently affects the parotid gland
            and can be classified as follows:
            • Inflammatory.
            •	Autoimmune.
            • Drug reactions.
            •	Metabolic.
            •	Neoplastic.
            •	Miscellaneous.
            Neoplasia usually produces a focal swelling in the gland. The one notable
            exception to this is MALToma, which often produces diffuse salivary gland
            swelling and can mimic an inflammatory cause.
            Inflammatory
            Inflammatory swellings are classified into:
            •	Acute specific: viral.
            • Chronic specific.
            •	Acute suppurative.
            • Chronic suppurative.
            Acute specific: viral
            •	The commonest viral infection to cause parotid swelling is mumps (see
              E Mumps, p. 485).
            •	Other viruses implicated in parotid swelling include:
              • coxsackieviruses;
              • cytomegalovirus;
              • parainfluenza viruses.

            HIV
            •	Associated with generalized lymphadenopathy.
            • Parotid enlargement is a common finding in children with HIV.
            •	Enlargement is firm, non-​tender, and solid.
            • Pain is unusual and treatment is not usually required.
            •	Adult patients with HIV may also present with parotid enlargement.
              They are prone to developing multiple cysts within the parotid gland.
            Chronic specific
            Chronic specific inflammatory disorders include:
            •	Tuberculosis:
              • rare in parotid glands;
              • usually associated with immunosuppression.
            • Sarcoidosis:
              • chronic multisystem disease of unknown aetiology;
              • can present as a smooth, firm, non-​tender salivary gland swelling;
              • hallmark of the disease is involvement of pulmonary lymph nodes;
              • biopsy reveals non-​caseating granulomas;
              • investigate with CXR, calcium levels, serum angiotensin-​converting
                enzyme (ACE);
              • usual treatment is corticosteroids;
              • response to treatment monitored with serum ACE levels.
                                             Diffuse gland swelling             193


Acute suppurative
•	Most frequently affects elderly or infirm patients.
• Common factor is dehydration resulting in reduced salivary flow and
  ascending infection.
• Investigated with USS to identify evidence of obstruction or abscess
  formation within gland—​sialography contraindicated in acute phase.
•	Treated by rehydration, antibiotic therapy, and removal of any
  obstruction.
•	Usually mixed Staphylococcus and Streptococcus
  infection—​treatment: co-​amoxiclav.
• Pus usually drains spontaneously via the duct such that formal surgical
  drainage is rarely required.
Chronic suppurative
• Large and heterogeneous group of conditions that is poorly
  understood.
• Patients present with recurrent symptoms of parotid swelling that
  appear to settle with good hydration and antibiotics—​symptoms are
  recurrent.
• Cause often unknown. A minority of patients will have salivary stones.
• Function of the gland allowing chronic ascending infection.
•	Treatment is initially conservative with antibiotics and massage ± salivary
  stimulants to encourage gland function.
• Some believe sialography can be therapeutic as well as diagnostic.
• Patients with chronic inflammatory disease who do not respond to
  conservative measures may benefit from surgery.
• Subtotal or near-​total parotidectomy is the treatment most widely
  advocated—​superficial lobe excision with piecemeal removal of the
  deep lobe from between facial nerve branches.
Autoimmune
Sjögren’s syndrome
• See % Sjögren’s syndrome p. 190.
IgG4-​related disease
• Fibroepithelial condition with 27–​53% of patients having salivary gland
  involvement including enlargement.
• Diagnosed by glandular biopsy, radiological changes (on USS) and serum
  IgG4 levels >135mg/​dL.
Drug reactions
Drugs implicated in parotid enlargement include guanethidine and iodine-​
containing agents. Drug-​related parotid enlargement usually produces a bi-
lateral painless swelling (sialosis).
Metabolic
Chronic asymptomatic enlargement of the parotid also occurs in malnour-
ished communities. This has been observed in pellagra for many years.
Other metabolic conditions include:
• Liver cirrhosis.
• Diabetes.
941



      194    Chapter 4      Salivary glands

            Miscellaneous
            Parotid duct stenosis
            Strictures near the parotid duct papilla can lead to a chronic parotid duct
            swelling known as a megaduct (Fig. 4.3).
            Pneumoparotitis
            This condition occurs in glass blowers and players of wind instruments. High
            pressure within the oral cavity results in inflation of the parotid gland with
            air. The air is usually absorbed into the gland or escapes back down the par-
            otid duct. Ascending bacterial infection is uncommon.




            Fig. 4.3 Right parotid megaduct.
Diffuse gland swelling   195
961



      196    Chapter 4     Salivary glands


            Localized gland swelling
            Benign tumours
            • Commonest cause of localized swelling of the salivary glands.
            •	More common in larger glands, the parotid accounting for most lesions
              (Fig. 4.4).
            •	Tumour most frequently encountered is the pleomorphic salivary
              adenoma (PSA). Produces a slowly growing mass that is clinically
              recognizable as a firm swelling within the territory of the gland.
            •	Adenomas can be monomorphic or pleomorphic.
            • PSA is the commonest salivary gland swelling of the upper lip.
            • Rare, but potential for malignant transformation.
            • Second most common is the Warthin’s tumour or lymphomatous
              papillary cystadenoma:
              • can be multifocal and/​or bilateral;
              • most commonly seen in smokers;
              • ♂ preponderance.




            Fig. 4.4 Parotid adenoma.
                                           Localized gland swelling                 197


Management
The main aim in the assessment of salivary gland tumours is to differentiate
benign from malignant disease. The only definitive histological diagnosis is from
surgical excision. The risk of false negatives from FNA (and to a lesser extent
core) biopsies supports surgical excision of salivary gland tumours. However,
FNA/​core biopsies have a role prior to surgery; if the lesion is known to be
malignant, this would warrant more radical surgery than for benign tumours.
Superficial parotidectomy
• Commonest surgical procedure for clinically benign focal parotid disease
  (Fig. 4.5 and Fig. 4.6).
•	Most parotid masses lie in the superficial lobe of the gland.
• Conventionally approached via a modified Blair incision starting at the
  superior border of the ear, continued inferiorly in the preauricular
  crease, under the ear lobe, over the mastoid bone, and into the neck
  two finger-​breadths below the lower border of the mandible.
•	Main trunk of the facial nerve can be identified in:
  • anterograde fashion (tragal pointer, posterior belly of digastric,
     squamotympanic fissure);
  • retrograde manner (buccal branch of facial nerve running with the
     duct, or marginal mandibular branch).
• Some surgeons advocate facelift incision (minimizes cosmetic impact of
  scar) (Fig. 4.7).
Superficial parotidectomy has the advantage of removing the tumour in its
entirety with a surrounding cuff of normal parotid tissue. Recurrence after
superficial parotidectomy is rare.
  Risks of superficial parotidectomy include:
• General risks of surgery in the head and neck, e.g. bleeding,
  haematoma, infection, scar.
• Facial nerve injury:
  • temporary nerve injury—​20%;
  • permanent injury—​1–​3%.
• Frey’s syndrome:
  • inappropriate re-​innervation of the acetylcholine receptors of
     the facial sweat glands with the preganglionic parasympathetic
     secretomotor fibres of the auriculotemporal nerve;
  • can be objectively demonstrated with starch iodine test in >90%
     patients (Fig. 4.8);
  • takes time to develop and may not be present until at least 1 year or
     more after surgery;
  • subjective symptoms (facial flushing and/​or sweating) in around 30%
     of patients;
  • a number of treatment options have been described (tympanic
     neurectomy, interpositional graft) but it is most readily treated with
     intradermal botulinum toxin.
• Salivary fistula and sialocoele:
  • occur as a result of continued salivary secretion from the cut surface
     of the parotid gland;
  • rarely results in pooling of saliva within the wound (sialocoele) or a
     leak of saliva through the surgical wound (fistula);
  • both are best treated conservatively (botulinum toxin into gland if
     active treatment required).
981



      198    Chapter 4      Salivary glands




            Fig. 4.5 Conventional approach to parotid tumour.




            Fig. 4.6 Completed superficial parotidectomy exposing the facial nerve.
                                               Localized gland swelling       199




Fig. 4.7 Modified facelift incision for parotid tumour.

Extracapsular dissection
•	Advocated as an alternative to superficial parotidectomy minimizing
  surgical morbidity.
• Same surgical approach as superficial parotidectomy but no attempt
  made to identify facial nerve.
• Good for medium-​sized lesions in the superficial lobe with no clinical
  concern about malignancy.
•	Advantages:
  • lower rate of temporary (8%) but not permanent facial nerve palsy
     (1–​3%), less Frey’s syndrome, minimizes post-​surgical defect without
     compromising recurrence rates (2% for PSA) (Fig. 4.9).
• Disadvantages:
  • if tumour turns out to be histologically malignant, completion surgery
     with a superficial parotidectomy may be required.
Management of deep lobe tumour
• Deep lobe tumour is defined as the tumour mass arising in the deep
  lobe of the parotid, deep to the branches of the facial nerve. These are
  rare, as most of the parotid tissue is in the superficial lobe.
•	The most commonly used approach is to access the deep lobe parotid
  via a superficial parotidectomy. The superficial parotid can be left in
  situ, pedicled anteriorly. The facial nerve branches are dissected free
  and mobilized to allow access to the deep lobe. The deep lobe is then
  dissected free from the pharyngeal space.
20



     200    Chapter 4      Salivary glands




           Fig. 4.8 Frey’s syndrome revealed by starch iodine test.

           •	A variety of different approaches are described for large tumours
             including the use of mandibular osteotomies to gain access to the
             parapharyngeal space.
           Malignant tumours
           • Commonest malignant parotid tumour is a secondary metastatic deposit
              arising from a cutaneous SCC of the ear/​scalp.
           • Primary malignant neoplasms of the salivary glands are comparatively
              rare—​around 800 cases per annum in the UK (Fig. 4.10).
           •	Many types, but those most frequently encountered include:
              • adenoid cystic carcinoma (most common overall);
              • mucoepidermoid carcinoma (most common in parotid);
              • acinic cell carcinoma.
           Malignant tumours of major glands become more common with decreasing
           gland size:
           • 15% of parotid tumours are malignant.
           • 35% of submandibular gland tumours are malignant.
           • 85% of sublingual gland tumours are malignant.
           • 50% of minor salivary glands tumours are malignant.
           Management
           Patients with salivary gland tumours should be assessed clinically, radio-
           graphically, and cytologically with the aim of staging the disease.
                                             Localized gland swelling   201




Fig. 4.9 Extracapsular dissection of parotid tumour.




Fig. 4.0 Malignant minor salivary gland tumour.
20



     202    Chapter 4      Salivary glands

               Clinical features of malignant neoplasm in the parotid include:
           • Facial nerve involvement (only in 20–​30%).
           • Cervical lymphadenopathy.
           • Rapid growth.
           • Pain.
           • Deep fixation.
           •	Overlying skin changes.
           All patients with malignant tumours should be discussed and treatment
           planned in an appropriate multidisciplinary manner. The options for treat-
           ment are surgery, RT, or combined modality treatment. Chemotherapy has
           little role in the treatment of salivary gland malignancy.
               Tumours of major salivary glands should be treated by surgical resection:
           • Radical resection involving the sacrifice of major structures, such as the
               facial nerve, is rarely warranted as there is little evidence that survival is
               improved.
           • Combining neck dissection with parotidectomy gains additional staging
               information and can improve survival. This is particularly the case in
               larger malignant parotid tumours (>3cm).
           •	Adjuvant RT is sometimes indicated, but generally only improves local
               control and does not improve overall survival.
           • In many cases the diagnosis of a major salivary gland malignant tumour
               is retrospective following histological assessment of what was believed
               at operation to be a benign tumour.
           • Further surgery is sometimes required to provide an adequate margin of
               clearance.
           Role of radiotherapy in benign salivary gland tumours
           •	Adjuvant RT for tumour spillage at primary surgery is controversial
             and should be discussed in an MDT setting. Risk of radiation-​induced
             tumours should be taken into account (1% per decade).
           • Proven benefit in multinodular PSA recurrence suggestive of tumour
             spillage during primary surgery. Adjuvant RT reduces the chance of
             second recurrence following surgery from 24% to 8% compared with
             surgery alone.
           •	No benefit in uninodular recurrences.
Localized gland swelling   203
204



      204    Chapter 4      Salivary glands


            Sialolithiasis
            • 80% of salivary calculi occur in submandibular gland.
            •	Majority of the rest occur in parotid gland.
            • <1% of calculi arise in sublingual gland.
            • Bilateral calculi rare.
            • Calculi composed mainly of phosphate and oxalate salts.
            • Prevalence—​up to 1.2% of population (accounts yearly for 59 hospital
              admissions per million of the UK population).
            • ~50% of cases asymptomatic.
            • Slight ♂ predominance.
            •	No known association with renal calculi.
            Management
            The options for symptomatic calculi lie between removing the calculi hence
            relieving gland obstruction or removing the obstructed gland. There is an
            increasing trend to gland preservation and minimal-​access surgical tech-
            niques, reducing the need for surgical removal to 2.9% of cases.
            Submandibular calculi
            • 90% are radiopaque.
            • Calculi in the submandibular impact at three points which reflect
              constrictions in the course of the submandibular duct system:
              • intraglandular;
              • at the hilum of the gland in the region of the mylohyoid muscle;
              • at the submandibular duct papillae (Fig. 4.11).
            Gland-​preserving treatments include:
            •	Transoral removal near duct papilla:
              • simple procedure performed under LA;
              • duct stenosis can occur following removal of stone but is rare.




            Fig. 4. Submandibular calculus impacted at the papilla.
                                                           Sialolithiasis       205


•	Transoral removal of hilar stone:
  • more demanding procedure that is usually carried out under a GA or
    LA with sedation;
  • main limitation of the procedure is ‘palpability’ of the stone—​if the
    stone is palpable transorally on bimanual examination then it can
    usually be successfully retrieved (bimanual palpation advised to avoid
    confusion with the hyoid bone).
•	Endoscopic/​radiologically guided stone retrieval:
  • sialoendoscopy has an emerging role in the management of
    obstructive salivary gland disease and can be useful from a diagnostic
    point of view in terms of identifying both the site of obstruction and
    mobility of the stone. Mobile stones are much easier to remove by
    basket compared to those tethered to the duct wall;
  • in similar fashion to renal stones it is also possible to apply
    intracorporeal lithotripsy to calculi via an endoscope;
  • calculi can be retrieved with a basket, although care must be taken
    to ensure that the distal duct diameter is wide enough to retrieve
    the stone.
Submandibular gland removal
In cases of intraglandular calculi or where gland preservation techniques
are not possible then the recommended treatment is submandibular
sialoadenectomy. This is a surgical procedure performed via a transcuta-
neous cervical incision.
   Three cranial nerves can be injured during submandibular gland excision:
•	Marginal mandibular branch of facial nerve:
   • supplies depressor anguli oris resulting in elevation of the angle of
     the mouth;
   • temporary palsy occurs in ~30% of patients, permanent damage
     is rare.
• Lingual nerve (rare).
• Hypoglossal nerve (rare).
Parotid calculi
• Less common than submandibular calculi.
•	Most obstructive parotid salivary gland pathology is not secondary to
  calculi but results from strictures in the ductal system. Mucous plugs or
  casts of epithelial cell debris in the ductal system can also be a cause of
  parotid salivary gland obstruction.
•	The parotid duct is of a narrower calibre than the submandibular duct
  and as such is more readily obstructed.
• Parotid calculi are often small and may be difficult to see on USS and
  plain radiography (60% are radiolucent).
•	The same general principles apply to the management of parotid calculi
  as those in the submandibular gland:
  • removal of calculi carries far less morbidity than parotidectomy;
  • endoscopic and interventional radiological techniques have an
     increasingly important role to play.
206



      206    Chapter 4     Salivary glands


            Ranula
            •	Mucous extravasation cyst of the floor of the mouth (source of mucous
              most commonly sublingual gland).
            •	Often presents in childhood.
            •	May be a history of minor trauma to the floor of the mouth that
              is thought to damage the numerous delicate ducts that drain the
              sublingual gland.
            •	Only rarely, as in the case of a plunging ranula, is there any swelling in
              the submandibular triangle.
            Management
            • Ranulas can be conservatively managed if they are small and not causing
              any problems.
            • Larger ranulas, and those causing symptoms, are best treated surgically.
            •	Attempts to partially excise or marsupialize a ranula (the so-​called
              deroofing procedure) is rarely successful as it tends to produce scarring
              of the floor of the mouth and further damage to the ducts draining the
              sublingual gland.
            •	Micromarsupialization is successful in 90% of cases.
            • Definitive treatment of a ranula is surgical excision of the ipsilateral
              sublingual gland.
Ranula   207
208



      208    Chapter 4      Salivary glands


            Disorders of minor salivary glands
            Mucocoele
            Mucocoeles of the minor salivary glands are extremely common. They
            form as a result of trauma to the mucosal surface that damages the delicate
            minor salivary glands and associated ducts in the submucosa. The result is a
            recurrent cystic swelling. They have the following characteristics:
            • History: recurrent swelling and mucous discharge with an intermittent
              cystic swelling. There is often a preceding history of trauma to the
              lower lip.
            • Site: lower lip mucosal surface most common (Fig. 4.12). Be suspicious
              of an alternative diagnosis at other sites, such as upper lip where minor
              salivary gland tumours are more common.
            • Examination: appears translucent or bluish in colour due to its mucous
              content. On palpation is soft. If large, diagnosis can be confirmed by
              transillumination.
            Treatment
            Mucocoeles are treated by simple surgical excision of the cyst and asso-
            ciated minor salivary gland, usually under LA. Complications are unusual,
            although it is possible to injure some of the terminal branches of the mental
            nerve resulting in localized reduction in sensation of the lip.
            Tumours
            •	Tumours of the minor salivary glands are important as ~50% are
              malignant.
            • Commonest malignant tumour is adenoid cystic carcinoma; commonest
              benign tumour is PSA.
            • Present as firm masses.
            • Sites with high malignancy rates:
              • retromolar;
              • floor of mouth.
            •	Upper lip tumours are usually benign (Figs. 4.13–​4.15).




            Fig. 4.2 Mucocoele of the lower lip.
                               Disorders of minor salivary glands   209




Fig. 4.3 Minor salivary gland tumour of upper lip.




Fig. 4.4 Removal of minor salivary gland tumour of upper lip.
021



      210    Chapter 4      Salivary glands




            Fig. 4.5 Excised specimen—​minor salivary gland tumour of upper lip.
 Chapter 5                      211



Orthognathic surgery
Introduction 212
Diagnosis and assessment 214
Records 222
Treatment planning 228
Presurgical orthodontics 234
Postsurgical orthodontics 238
Surgical management 240
Maxillary procedures 242
Mandibular procedures 254
Genioplasty 264
Complications 266
Soft tissue changes 270
Stability 272
Distraction osteogenesis 276
Obstructive sleep apnoea 282
21



     212    Chapter 5     Orthognathic surgery


           Introduction
           • Orthognathic (from the Greek orthos (straight) and gnathos (jaw))
             surgery is surgery to treat facial disproportion.
           • ~20% of the population is affected by a dentofacial deformity.
           • Successful management of this group of patients requires a MDT
             involving orthodontists and maxillofacial surgeons, together with
             restorative dentists, hygienists, psychologists, and technicians.
           •	Accurate diagnosis and appropriate treatment planning are both
             essential to a successful outcome.
           • Deformity can be:
             • isolated or global;
             • unilateral or bilateral;
             • transverse, anteroposterior, or vertical, or a combination of any or all;
             • dental or skeletal or a combination;
             • hard or soft tissue, or a combination;
             • progressive or static.

           Aetiology
           The pathogenesis of anomalous facial development is complex, multifac-
           torial (genetic and environmental), and, in many cases, simply represents
           the extremes of variation of normal development. Some cases are associ-
           ated with recognized syndromes.
              Some conditions that may present with an actual or apparent facial de-
           formity include:
           •	Hemifacial microsomia.
           • Goldenhar syndrome.
           •	Hemifacial hypertrophy.
           •	Acromegaly and gigantism.
           • Treacher Collins syndrome.
           • Parry–​Romberg syndrome.
           • Linear scleroderma.
           • Dwarfism.
           •	Achondroplasia.
           • Scar/​burn/​trauma-​related contractures.
           • Torticollis.
           There are various theories of facial development and growth including
           Sicher’s sutural theory; cartilaginous theory, popularized by Scott; functional
           matrix theory of Melvin Moss; Servosystem of Petrovic; and Enlow’s V prin-
           ciple. The current understanding is that facial development and growth is
           complex and involves interaction between hard and soft tissue elements,
           with genetic influences modified by environmental factors. An under-
           standing of growth and development is important for treatment planning at
           the correct skeletal and dental ages.
           Facial growth
           Postnatal facial growth in the first years of life primarily involves the skull
           vault and complements brain development and growth. The upper part of
           the face, frontal bar and orbits, and cranial base including the ears, develop
           in the early mixed dentition stage, the maxilla in the early teens, and the
                                                          Introduction            213


mandible is the last part of the facial skeleton to continue growth, usually to
the late teens but it can continue into the early twenties.
Growth spurts
See Table 5..
Growth and timing of treatment
• Surgical correction is usually deferred until growth has ceased in most
   cases. Important in cases of asymmetry and Class III and open bite
   cases, which may continue to evolve until the end of facial growth.
•	Assess at what age the deformity first became apparent. Development
   of a Class III malocclusion in adulthood may, for example, arise due to
   systemic disease such as acromegaly.
• Childhood TMJ trauma or sepsis may result in abnormal growth.
• Developing an anterior open bite after the cessation of growth points to
   condylar resorption or sometimes periodontal disease.
• In asymmetric cases, establish whether or not the condition is
   progressive, e.g. in unilateral condylar hyperplasia, interventional surgery
   may be indicated at an early stage to reduce later secondary changes in
   the occlusal plane.
• Most asymmetries become apparent during the adolescent
   growth spurt.
In general, treatment is deferred until a stable situation is reached, often
best assessed with serial records.
Treatment objectives
• Function:
  • establish a functional occlusion aiming to achieve normal overbite/​
    overjet and transverse relationships;
  • improve airway and correct sleep apnoea;
  • improve oral health (facilitating maintenance of oral hygiene).
• Aesthetics:
  • normalize facial balance and proportions in three dimensions.
  • provide stable results in the long term.

Other possible benefits
• Temporomandibular joint dysfunction syndrome (TMJDS). (There is
  no firm evidence to justify surgery to treat TMD and in one-​third of
  patients symptoms of TMD may worsen post orthognathic surgery.)
• Mouth opening.
• Swallow.
• Speech.
• Psychological improvement.
• Traumatic occlusions and dental health.

 Table 5. Growth spurts by sex

                      Puberty           Pubertal spurt    Stop
 Female (years)       8–​0             0–​4            5–​6
 Male (years)         0–​3            2–​6            6–​8
421



      214    Chapter 5     Orthognathic surgery


            Diagnosis and assessment
            Systematic evaluation of patient for orthognathic surgery
            This involves the following steps:
            • Patient concerns.
            • Medical/​dental history.
            • Clinical examination.
            • Radiographic examination/​analysis.
            • Study models and assessment.
            • Problem list.
            • Treatment plan.
            Patient concerns
            Patient motivation is of key importance, and treatment satisfaction is deter-
            mined by how well the patient’s main concerns are addressed.
              Presenting complaints tend to fall into two broad categories:
            Functional disturbance
            •	Actual or potential.
            • Commonest complaints relate to difficulty in biting or chewing, e.g.
              significant reverse overjet or anterior open bite.
            • Traumatic overbite in Class II division 2 malocclusions.
            • TMJ-​related symptoms. Care must be exercised in promising a
              resolution of symptoms with orthognathic surgery.
            • Sleep apnoea and snoring.
            Aesthetic concerns
            • More difficult to assess.
            • Subjective/​objective assessment.
            • May be immediately obvious to the clinician (a prominent chin or very
              hypoplastic maxilla) or facial asymmetry.
            •	Understanding the patient’s aesthetic concerns and what they wish to
              achieve is essential.

               Consider the possibility of body dysmorphic disorder, and try to identify
               this group of patients before embarking upon treatment. Some teams
               have access to a clinical psychologist to screen patients.


            Clues to body dysmorphic disorder
            • Patient concerns appear out of proportion to extent of deformity.
            • Patient unable to clearly express what they see as the deformity,
              descriptions are often vague or non-​specific.
            • Patient concerns have led to significant distress, anxiety, or depression.
            • Withdrawal from or avoidance of social contact and employment.
            • May attribute failed relationships or inability to find employment to facial
              appearance.
            • May have had previous cosmetic type surgery, and may be dissatisfied
              with results.
            • May have sought numerous opinions.
                                           Diagnosis and assessment               215


Medical and dental history
Diagnostic and risk factors to be covered in history include
• Type of congenital or developmental deformity.
• Whether syndromic and any other anomalies exist—​in the face (orbital,
  ears) and the rest of the body (cardiac, spine).
• Progressive or static nature of deformity.
• Functional problems—​respiratory problems, sinus disease, speech
  problems, masticatory problems, swallowing difficulties.
• Coexistent musculoskeletal deformity.
• Coexisting medical conditions that may contribute to facial deformity,
  e.g. chronic juvenile arthritis (severe Class II) or acromegaly (Class III).
• Medical conditions that impact suitability for treatment and the
  likelihood for developing complications.
• Infection and immunocompromised state.
• Bone, connective tissue disorders, and soft tissue pathology.
• Bleeding disorder/​Jehovah’s witness.
• Medications (specifically bisphosphonates, anticoagulants, steroids, oral
  contraception).
•	Neuromuscular disorders.
• TMJDS (internal derangement/​myofascial pain).
•	Allergies.
Dental history
• Consider caries, periodontal disease, and TMJ disorders.
• Pattern of orthodontic extractions may be influenced by the prognosis
  of carious or restored teeth.
• Orthodontic and orthognathic surgery contraindicated in the presence
  of active or advanced periodontal disease.
• Pre-​existing TMJ conditions may predispose to condylar resorption and
  relapse.
• Patient compliance, social and work/​educational commitment, family
  support, siblings, extrinsic motivators.
• Previous orthodontic/​orthognathic treatment.
Clinical examination
Comprises
• Patient positioning.
• General examination.
• Local examination:
  • extraoral;
  • frontal and profile;
  • intraoral.

Patient positioning
Patient positioning and preparation prior to examination is critical.
   The patient should be relaxed and comfortably seated upright in a
straight-​backed chair in good light.
   The patient is examined in the natural head position obtained with the
patient’s pupils parallel to the floor (if orbital dystopia—​ear lobes parallel
to floor) or with FH plane (Frankfort horizontal—​line joining porion to
orbitale) parallel to the floor (as this coincides with the natural head pos-
ition for most patients).
621



      216    Chapter 5     Orthognathic surgery

              Patient evaluated in:
            • Centric relation:
              • not occlusion—​the tip of tongue as far back on the palate and close
                mouth until teeth just touch.
            • Lips relaxed, not forced shut.
            • Mandible not postured.
            Things to be wary of
            • Patients, particularly those with asymmetric deformities, may present
              with an abnormal head position habitually developed for either
              functional reasons, e.g. sternomastoid shortening, or to mask their
              deformity.
            • Some Class II patients can tip the head back and Class III cases can tip
              the chin down to camouflage their actual jaw relationship. It is important
              to compensate for such abnormal head posture if a true assessment is
              to be carried out.
            • Many Class II patients tend to habitually position their mandible forward
              to mask the degree of deformity.
            General examination
            •	Assess for any obvious dysmorphic or syndromic features including
              extracranial features.
            • Take account of statistical differences between different ethnicities when
              examining the patient. Ensure any pathology or issues raised during
              medical history taking are followed up.
            •	Ensure patient physical fitness to undergo an operation under GA is
              determined.
            Local examination
            Extraoral
            • This is assessed in frontal and profile views.
            Vertical analysis—​front-​on view
            • Facial halves—​symmetry and any striking feature (generally the two
              halves of the face are not exactly symmetrical).
            • Cranial base assessment and orbital dystopia.
            • Level of ear lobes.
            The normal face is divided into equal thirds (Fig. 5.):
            • Upper face: hair line (trichion) to glabella.
            • Midface: glabella to subnasale.
            • Lower face: subnasale to soft tissue menton.
            • The lower third of the face is further divided:
              • upper /​3 extending from subnasale to the upper lip stomion;
              • lower 2/​3 running from the lower lip stomion to the soft tissue menton.
            These vertical proportions are applied in both the frontal and profile views.
            • Facial 2/​3 (Fig. 5.2).
            • Forehead—​symmetry, size, deformity.
            •	Eyebrow—​shape, position, and symmetry (♂ larger, more horizontal, at
              supraorbital rim; ♀ arched, peak 0mm above the rim).
            •	Eyes—​symmetry, size, deformity; supraorbital rim should project 0mm
              in front of the cornea.
                                                 Diagnosis and assessment                217



                                                             Hairline

                                                         /
                                                             Glabella

                                                         /

                                                             Subnasale
                                           /
                                                         /
                                           /
                                                             Menton


Fig. 5. Frontal view of the face showing division into thirds and further subdivision
of lower third.

     Facial Proportions


                                               /3


                                               /3


                                               /3



                                   Rules-of-Thumb

Fig. 5.2 Diagram of frontal face division into fifths.
Courtesy of Paul Johnson.

• Orbit—​symmetry, size, deformity; lateral orbital rim should be 8–​2mm
  behind cornea.
•	Nose—​symmetry, size, deformity.
•	Normal intercanthal distance 32 ± 3mm white and 35 ± 3mm Asian and
  Afro-​Caribbean.
•	Normal interpupillary distance is 65 ± 3 mm.
• Intercanthal distance same as palpebral fissure width same as alar base width.
• Width of nasal dorsum—​2/​3 intercanthal width, width of nasal lobule
  2/​3 intercanthal width.
• Vertical line through medial canthus should fall on alar base (± 2mm).
•	Nasolabial angle 00° (± 0°) greater in ♀ than ♂.
• Malar eminence should be 0–​5mm lateral to and 5–​20mm inferior to
  the lateral canthus.
•	Upper lip length subnasale to upper lip stomion ♂ (22 ± 2mm) and ♂
  (20 ± 2mm).
821



      218    Chapter 5      Orthognathic surgery

            •	Normal maxillary incisor exposure 2.5 mm (± .5mm) in repose; when
              smiling –​2mm gingival exposure.
            • Incisal show varies with:
              • age—​decreases with age;
              • sex—​  ♀ show more than ♂;
              • ethnicity—​Caucasian > Asians > Afro-​Caribbean people;
              • upper lip length (the longer it is, the lesser the show);
              • incisal attrition (the longer it is, the lesser the show).
            • Facial midline, chin midline, dental midline, and nasal midlines should be
              coincident.
            • Lower eyelid at level with iris or above—​no scleral show, scleral show
              may indicate infraorbital hypoplasia or exophthalmos.
            • Glabella:subnasale to subnasale:soft tissue menton :.
            •	Upper lip length = 2/​3 lower third of face, i.e. subnasale:upper lip
              stomion to lower lip stomion:soft tissue menton (:2); upper lip 30%
              anterior lower facial height;
            • Lower lip shows 25% more vermillion than upper lip.
            •	Neck, chin, throat angle is 0° (cervicomental angle).
            Lateral analysis—​profile view
            • Ideal chin projection if maxilla is in normal AP position—​perpendicular
              through subnasale 3mm anterior to soft tissue menton.
            •	Upper lip stomion –​2mm anterior to subnasale perpendicular.
            • Frankfort–​mandibular plane angle—​high low and normal.
            • Line perpendicular to Frankfort horizontal plane and tangent to the
              globe should fall on the infraorbital soft tissues ±2mm.
            Facial proportions
            Frontal view
            Profile view
            See Fig. 5.3.
            Maxilla
            •	Either normal, over-​projected, or hypoplastic (suggested by paranasal
              hollowing). Determine the level of hypoplasia, i.e. scleral show,
              infraorbital margins, paranasal hollowing, and nasolabial angle.
            •	Nasolabial angle 00° ± 0°—​influenced by the degree of lip support
              derived from the upper incisors.
            • Obtuse nasolabial angle (sometimes called a more open nasolabial
              angle) is associated with maxillary hypoplasia or upper incisor
              retroclination, or may be related to an upturned nose.
            •	Angulation of upper incisors to maxillary plane.
            • Lip competency.
            Mandible
            • Can be normal, prognathic/​progenic, and retrognathic/​retrogenic
              (Fig. 5.4).
            Factors that can affect tooth exposure with smile
            •	AP position of maxilla.
            • Overjet.
                                                    Diagnosis and assessment                     219


• Overbite.
•	Upper lip length.
• Clinical crown length.
•	Neuromuscular control of lip.
• Periodontal coverage of anterior teeth.
•	Angulation of maxillary alveolus.




                                                                                  /3




                                                                                   /3



                                                                            /3
                                                                                   /3
                                                                           2/
                                                                             3




Fig. 5.3 Profile view of the face showing division into upper, middle, and lower thirds.

              According to:
                  RICKET TS                                STEINER




Fig. 5.4 Ricketts and Steiner’s lines. Allows an assessment of the anteroposterior
relationships of the lips.
Reproduced with permission from Henderson D. (986). Colour Atlas and Textbook of Orthognathic
Surgery. Book Medical Publisher Inc. with permission of Elsevier.
20



     220    Chapter 5       Orthognathic surgery

           Intraoral examination
           Assess
           • The number of teeth.
           • Primary/​secondary dentition.
           •	Arch shape and width—​maxilla/​mandible (cross bite and transverse
             arch discrepancies).
           • Crowding, rotation, displaced, missing, impacted teeth.
           • Shape and size of individual teeth + mineralization and their caries/​
             periodontal status.
           • Oral hygiene.
           • Occlusal relationship (incisor, canine, molar).
           • Overjet, overbite.
           • Curve of Wilson, curve of Spee.
           • Centric occlusion.
           • Displacing contacts.
           • Identify dental compensation.
           • Tongue, size, aberrant function.
           • Mucosal pathology.
           • Canting (maxilla/​lip).
           • Periodontal health.
           • TMJ evaluation.
           Measure
           • Overbite and overjet.
           •	Upper incisor show at rest 2–​3mm.
           •	Upper incisor show when smiling.
           •	Any occlusal cants.
           • Maxillary dental centre line position with relation to the facial midline.
           • Mandibular dental centre line position with relation to the facial midline.
           • Mandibular dental centre line position with relation to the central
             chin point.
           • Check for displacements on closing, which may either mask or enhance
             the true degree of skeletal discrepancy.
           • Pitch, yaw, and roll (Table 5.2).

            Table 5.2 Definitions of pitch, yaw, and roll
            Yaw      Vertical axis                          A positive yawing motion will move
                     In an aeroplane will pass from         the nose of the aircraft to the right,
                     centre vertically downwards            while the tail will move to the left
            Pitch    Lateral axis                           A positive pitching motion will raise
                     In an aeroplane will run wing tip      the nose tip up and tail will go down
                     to wing tip
                     Also called transverse axis
            Roll     Longitudinal axis                      A positive roll will take the right
                     In a plane will run from nose          wing down and left wing up
                     to tail
Diagnosis and assessment   221
2



    222    Chapter 5      Orthognathic surgery


          Records
          Records are increasingly in digital format for photographs, radiographs, and
          study models. This may include the use of CBCT records where appro-
          priate. Some units routinely use intraoral scanning and 3D digital planning.
          Photographs
          Standard facial views include full face at rest and smiling, right and left lateral
          views, and three-​quarter views. Include intraoral views to show occlusion,
          frontal view of teeth in occlusion, right and left lateral views, and mirror
          shots of the upper and lower dental arches (Fig. 5.5).
             If clinical photographs are to be used with digital planning it is important
          to standardize how they are taken and also have a marker to orient head
          position correctly, such as a vertical thread hanging in front of the patient
          at a set distance.
          Study models
          Surgical planning for most procedures requires mounted models on some
          form of adjustable anatomical articulator. This is especially important for
          maxillary movements. In some units these records are also in digital format.
          Radiographs
          • Orthopantomogram (OPG) panoramic view to assess for pathology,
            wisdom teeth, and TMJ evaluation.
          • Lateral cephalogram for cephalometric analysis and treatment planning.
          • Occlusal or periapical views as required if specific dental pathology
            needs to be assessed.
          • Posteroanterior cephalogram in cases of asymmetry. Although if there
            is a significant asymmetry most units would consider CT scans for
            evaluation and planning.
          • Special investigations. (These may be required in some cases, e.g. bone
            scintigraphy to evaluate suspected condylar hyperplasia.)
          • Cephalometrics. Cephalo means head, metric means measurement. It
            was independently introduced by Broadbent and Hofrath in 93.
          • Jacobson described the major components to be evaluated:
            • cranium;
            • cranial base;
            • skeletal maxilla;
            • skeletal mandible;
            • maxillary dentition;
            • mandibular dentition.
          •	A cephalometric landmark is a conspicuous point that serves as a guide
            for measurement or construction of planes (anatomic vs constructed).
          • Cephalometric analysis (Fig. 5.6) forms the basis of orthognathic
            assessment and treatment planning, and underpins all current computer
            planning applications and profile prediction software.
          • In aesthetic clinical planning of orthognathic surgical cases, however,
            emphasis is not on cephalometric planes and angles but actual clinical
            examination and assessment. This is the technique that is widely used if
            3D planning and software is not used.
                                                                         Records   223




Fig. 5.5 Set of standard photographic views for orthognathic records.

                                                          80
                                                          68




                57

                53

                48                                                  .4



                                                               2

           58
            56

           87                                87
                                                                    38



Fig. 5.6 Lateral cephalogram showing one of a number of available analyses.
24



     224    Chapter 5      Orthognathic surgery

           • The lateral cephalogram:
             • positioning with the Frankfort plane horizontal—​essential that the patient
               does not posture the teeth into an abnormal position;
             • avoid patient forward posturing the mandible—​commonly seen in
               Class II patients.
           •	A multitude of different analyses are available and orthodontic texts
             should be consulted for more details (see % Three commonly used
             analyses, p. 227).
           • Most commonly used for orthognathic planning are those of the
             Eastman, Downs, and Rickets.
           Useful cephalometric relationships
           • SNA is an indication of the relationship of the maxilla to the cranial base
             in the sagittal plane. Normal range 78–​84°, mean 8°.
           • SNB is an indication of the relationship of the mandible to the cranial
             base in the sagittal plane. Normal range 77–​82°, mean 79°.
           •	ANB is an indication of the relationship of the mandible to the maxilla.
             Normal range –​3° with A point anterior to B.
           • SNPo is an indication of the relationship of the chin to the cranial base,
             independently of SNA/​SNB.
           •	NPo is the facial plane and is an important reference plane for
             establishing facial convexity.
           • Frankfort horizontal passes through both orbitale and porion. It has
             traditionally been used to define high-​and low-​angle cases relating
             the angle of the mandibular plane to the cranial base—​the Frankfort–​
             mandibular angle (high is >40°).
           • SN–​MP sella and nasion are reliable points subject to less plotting error
             than the Frankfurt horizontal hence SN–​MP is a good index of the slope
             of the mandibular plane. Mean angle 32°.
           • Cephalometric planes (both horizontal and vertical) are shown in
             Table 5.3.
           Linear measurements
           See Fig. 5.7.
           Vertical proportions
           •	Anterior lower facial height is normally 55% of the total with anterior
             upper facial height being 45%.
           • Relationships between these proportions are given in Table 5.4.
                                                                       Records      225


Cephalometric analyses
See Table 5.5.
Special investigations
In complex deformities, those with a significant asymmetry or a syndromic
aetiology, CT scanning can be particularly useful. 3D reformatting allows a
rapid appreciation of skeletal morphology.
   Construction of accurate skeletal models facilitates both diagnosis and
surgical planning. Bone scans may have a role to play in some cases (e.g. con-
dylar hyperplasia) to establish whether or not active growth is taking place.

 Table 5.3 Cephalometric planes
 Plane                  Symbol        Points connected
 Horizontal
 Frankfurt horizontal   FH            Porion to orbitale
 Sella–​nasion          SN            Sella to nasion
 Basion–​nasion         Ba–​N         Basion to nasion
 Palatal plane          PNS–​ANS      Posterior nasal spine—​anterior nasal spine
 Occlusal plane                       Mesiobuccal cusp of st molars to incisor
                                      edges
 Mandibular plane       Tweed         Tangent to lower border
                        Downs         Gonion to menton
                        Steiners      Gonion to gnathion
 Vertical
 Facial plane           N–​Pog        Nasion to pogonion
 A–​Pog line                          Point A on maxilla to pogonion
 Facial axis            Ptm–​Gn       Pterygomaxillary fissure–​gnathion
 Aesthetic plane        E plane       Tip of nose to soft tissue pogonion
                                      (Rickets)
 S line                               Line connecting midpoint of columella to
                                      soft tissue pogonion
 Y axis                 Growth axis   Sella–​gnathion
26



     226    Chapter 5            Orthognathic surgery


            Table 5.4 Facial heights
            Anterior                     AFH                        Nasion–​menton (N–​Me)
             Anterior upper              AUFH (45%)                 Nasion–​ANS (N–​ANS)
             Anterior lower              ALFH (55%)                 ANS–​menton (ANS-​Me)
            Posterior                    PFH                        Sella–​gonion (S–​Go)
            Posterior upper              PUFH                       Sella–​PNS (S-​PNS)
            Posterior lower              PLFH                       PNS–​gonion (PNS–​Go)
            FH, facial height.




                                                                                                      SN
                                                                      N
                                                 S
                                                                                      AUFH
                    SN-MP                                                            (N-ANS)
                                                      PUFH
                                                     (S-PNS)                                     ATFH
                                                                          ANS
                                                     PNS                                         (N-Me)
                                    PTFH
                                    (S-Go)         P
                                                (PN LFH                                     ALFH
                                                   S-M                                           e)
                                                       P)                                 (ANS-M

                                               Go


                                                               Me
                                                                              MP

           Fig. 5.7 Linear measurements. Traced lateral cephalogram showing anterior and
           posterior face heights, and the ratio of upper to lower face height.
           Reproduced with permission from Henderson D. (986). Colour Atlas and Textbook of Orthognathic
           Surgery. Book Medical Publisher Inc. with permission of Elsevier.
                                                                                 Records    227


Table 5.5 Three forms of cephalometric analysis
Downs cephalometric analysis
Facial angle—​angle between FH and N–​Pog                   Average value 88°; range ± 5°
                                                            Retrognathic <83°,
                                                            prognathic >93°
Angle of convexity N–​A–​Pog                                Average value 0°
A–​B plane angle—​angle between vertical line               Positive in Class III
joining A–​B vs N–​Pog
Mandibular plane angle—​FH–​lower border                    8–​25°
tangential
Y axis or growth axis—​S–​Gn to FH plane                    Average 60°; range 55–​65°
Occlusal plane angle—​compared to FH                        Average 0°; range 2–​4°
Interincisal angle                                          Average 35° (i in division
                                                            2)
IMPA (incisor lower long axis—​mandibular plane)            90° ± 5°
Steiner cephalometric analysis
Skeletal analysis
SNA (relation of maxilla to cranial base)                   82°
SNB (relation of mandible to cranial base)                  80°
ANB (relation of mandible to maxilla)                       2°
Mand plane SN–​GoGn                                         32°
Occlusal plane angle SN–​Occ plane                          5°
Dental
UI to nasion perpendicular                                  22°
UI to NA (linear measure)                                   2–​4mm
Interincisal
LI to NB angle                                              30°
LI to NB (linear measure)                                   25°
SnPo (relation of chin to cranial base)                     2–​4mm
N–​Po (nasion–​pogonion )                                   Establishes facial convexity
Tweed cephalometric analysis
3 planes—​diagnostic triangle
FH, mand plane, long axis of lower incisor
FMPA                                                        25° (> 40° high angle)
IMPA                                                        90°
FMIA                                                        65°
FMIA, Frankfort mandibular–​incisor angle; FMPA, Frankfort–​mandibular plane angle; IMPA,
incisor–​mandibular plane angle.
28



     228    Chapter 5     Orthognathic surgery


           Treatment planning
           Diagnostic list
           The first step is to formulate a diagnostic problem list and create an initial
           surgical treatment objective.
              A diagnostic problem list can be considered under the following
           categories:
           • Skeletal imbalance.
           • Dental imbalance.
           • Occlusal problems.
           • Functional problems.
           •	Aesthetic problems.
           • TMJ dysfunction.
           • Myofascial pain.
           Then use a checklist to ensure important parameters have been considered
           in the planning.
           Checklist: essential clinical information for planning
           • Class I/​II/​III occlusion (dental).
           • Skeletal base relationship (facial).
           • Maxilla AP—​hypoplastic/​normal.
           • Maxilla vertical—​vertical maxillary excess as assessed by:
             • upper incisor show at rest;
             • upper incisor show smiling.
           • Maxilla transverse—​discrepancy as assessed by:
             • buccal corridors and tooth visible on smiling;
             • shape of the palate (e.g. V shaped and high arched).
           • Chin position normal/​retrogenic/​progenic.
           • Centre lines compared as follows:
             • upper dental to facial;
             • lower dental to chin point;
             • upper and lower dental.
           • Overjet/​overbite.
           • Occlusal cant—​yes/​no?
           •	Nasolabial angle.
           •	Upper lip length.
           •	Alar base width/​nasal tip.
           • Cervicomental angle.
           Initial surgical treatment objective
           The purpose of the surgical treatment objective is to establish:
           • Orthodontic goals.
           • Develop surgical objectives.
           • Create predicted facial profile.
           There are three critical decisions to make:
           • Vertical position of maxillary incisor.
           •	AP position of maxillary incisor.
           • Occlusal plane angulation.
                                                   Treatment planning              229


Sequence of treatment
Although not prescriptive to all cases, the usual sequence of treatment will
follow this pattern:
• Dental hygiene, oral and perio health are initially addressed.
• TMJ problems stabilized.
• Presurgical orthodontics.
• Orthognathic surgery.
• Postsurgical orthodontics.
In some cases, early surgery may be appropriate.
Definitive surgical planning
Planning is essentially a clinical exercise and cannot be successfully achieved
without the patient. A logical and systematic approach is essential and out-
lined is a scheme that can be universally applied to all cases. While by no
means exhaustive, this scheme will give reliable results in the vast majority
of patients and certainly be more than adequate for any exam situation.
Determine the position in which to place the upper incisor tip, defined in three
dimensions (AP, vertical, and lateral)
• The vertical position of the incisor tip is defined by the degree of
  vertical maxillary excess and the upper incisor show at rest.
•	Normal incisor show is 2–​3mm.
•	Advancement of the maxilla increases upper incisor show, any AP
  change in the maxilla must therefore be considered in relation to the
  desired vertical position of the incisor tip, i.e. a patient with normal
  incisor show of 3mm who requires a maxillary advance of cm will in
  addition require a degree of maxillary impaction in order to maintain
  the incisor show at current levels.
• The AP position of the incisor tip is determined by:
  •	AP position of the maxilla;
  • nasolabial angle;
  • degree of lip support;
  • lateral relationship is determined by the upper dental centre line in
    relation to the facial midline. If correction of the maxillary dental
    centre line is required surgically, one must consider whether to
    rotate the maxilla or move it bodily sideways. Introduction of a ‘yaw’
    deformity may result in facial asymmetry or difficulties in positioning
    the mandible.
Next determine the position of the posterior maxilla
•	AP movement and rotational movement of the posterior maxilla must
  equal the movement of the incisor tip (unless segmental surgery is being
  considered).
• Vertical movement of the maxilla, however, may differ between the
  anterior and posterior.
• In anterior open bite cases, a differential impaction with greater
  impaction of the maxilla posteriorly is often required.
• Differential posterior impaction may also be indicated to deliberately
  alter the maxillary occlusal plane.
230



      230    Chapter 5     Orthognathic surgery

            • Lateral width discrepancies may be treated with:
              • surgically assisted rapid maxillary expansion (SARPE);
              • maxillary midline widening;
              • mandibular narrowing.

            Then determine mandibular movements
            • Mandibular movements are those required to achieve a
              Class I relationship.
            • Consider the lower dental centre line in relation to the upper dental
              centre line and facial midline.
            •	Note whether or not the lower dental centre line is coincident with the
              centre line of the chin. If they are coincident then aligning the dental
              centre lines will deliver the chin point to the facial midline. If they are
              not, the chin point must be addressed separately.
            Lastly, look at the chin
            • The chin position can be altered by genioplasty.
            • Consider the movement required in three dimensions: AP, vertically, and
              laterally.
            • The AP position of the chin can be influenced by the maxillary occlusal
              plane. In patients for whom advancing the mandible would render them
              prognathic, one treatment strategy is to alter the maxillary occlusal
              plane. Posterior impaction of the maxilla forces clockwise rotation of
              the mandible and minimizes chin advancement.
            Pattern recognition
            Pattern recognition is important in orthognathic surgery. With experience
            one will learn to recognize a number of familiar presentations and these
            in turn suggest predictable treatment plans. However, individualized treat-
            ment plans are important to satisfy patient concerns.
            Common examples
            • Class III patient with maxillary hypoplasia and mandibular prognathism
              with an average face height and no open bite—​treatment: following
              presurgical orthodontic preparation, a maxillary advance and a
              mandibular set-​back.
            • Class III patient with a long face and high Frankfort–​mandibular plane
              angle often with an open bite—​treatment: following presurgical
              orthodontic preparation, maxillary impaction and advance with greater
              posterior impaction to correct open bite and mandibular set-​back.
            • Class II division 2 patient with retrogenia, a deep overbite, and a
              reduced lower anterior face height—​treatment: orthodontic conversion
              to a Class II division  malocclusion maintaining the curve of Spee
              and a subsequent mandibular advance to a three-​point landing, which
              establishes a Class I occlusion and increases the lower anterior face
              height.
            • Class II patients with a long face (vertical maxillary excess), retrogenia,
              and an anterior open bite—​treatment: maxillary impaction (greater
              posterior than anterior) to close the open bite along with autorotation
              and advancement of the mandible.
            • Class II patients with retrogenia and good maxillary position—​
              treatment: simple mandibular advance.
                                                       Treatment planning            231


• Severe class II patients with significant retrogenia and bird-​face type
  deformity—​treatment: depending on severity suggests mandibular
  advance with advancement genioplasty, inverted ‘L’ osteotomies or
  distraction osteogenesis.
Hard to soft tissue relationships
Orthognathic surgery moves the bones of the facial skeleton, but the aes-
thetic result is determined by the soft tissue profile. An understanding of
how the soft tissues move relative to the underlying bone is therefore of
importance in the planning of surgery. In aesthetic planning, the surgeon
works backwards, determining where the soft tissues and overall facial
profile should be at the outset, and then planning the bony movements to
achieve this position. Finally the tooth positions required for this result to
be achieved are determined and the orthodontist then facilitates these by
phases of initial presurgical orthodontics largely aimed at allowing surgical
movements and final postsurgical orthodontics to ‘fine tune’ the occlusion.
  This can mean a set up does not need to be fully decompensated or can
dictate extraction patterns if greater horizontal movements are planned.
Currently, digital planning does not accurately reflect all soft tissue move-
ments as they are not absolutely predictable.
  All planning therefore involves aesthetic assessment at the outset and
then use of available tools (models/​photos/​radiographs/​digital software)
to achieve that objective.
A rough guide on soft tissue changes with movements is as follows
See also Table 5.6.
Nasal tip relative to A point
Moves in a ratio of approximately:
• :3 for osteotomies at the Le Fort I level.
• :2 for Le Fort II.
• : for Le Fort III.

 Table 5.6 Rough guide to soft tissue change with orthognathic jaw movements
 Nasal tip relative to       Le Fort I   :3
 point A
                             Le Fort II :2
                             Le Fort III :
 Upper lip                   Le Fort I   80% of amount maxilla advanced
                                         50% of amount maxilla is set-​back
 Thick lip moves less than               50% of amount when maxilla moved down
 thin; cleft scarred lip
                                         0–​40% of amount when maxilla impacted
 Lower lip                   BSSO        80% of amount advanced
                             BSSO        60% of amount set-​back
 Chin                                    : movement of soft tissue pogonion with
                                         set-​back or advancement
23



     232    Chapter 5     Orthognathic surgery

           Upper lip
           •	At the Le Fort I level the upper lip moves forward ~80% of the amount
             of maxillary advancement.
           • When the maxilla is set-​back, the lip moves by ~50% of the
             skeletal move.
           • For maxillary impaction, the lip moves up between 0% and 40% of the
             bony impaction and lengthens by ~50% of any downward movement.
           • The morphology of the lip will affect these predictions with a thick,
             fleshy lip moving relatively less than a thin lip.
           •	A tight, scarred lip as may occur in a cleft patient may move in a ratio
             of :.
           Lower lip
           The movement of the lower lip is altered by many factors and does not
           follow the lower incisor teeth in any predictable pattern, although estimates
           of ~85% of the skeletal move in advancement and 60% with set-​back are
           quoted.
           Chin
           Soft tissue pogonion moves consistently in a : fashion with either man-
           dibular advance or set-​back.
           Adjuncts to planning
           • The planning process can be refined by:
             • cephalometric prediction tracing;
             • photocephalometric planning;
             • computerized programmes (which may be 2D or increasingly 3D).
           •	Ensure that patients do not interpret these images as more than a
             prediction or imply any guarantee regarding the final outcome.
           • Certain features are difficult to record accurately from the patient.
             One such example is a maxillary occlusal cant, the true extent of which
             can be difficult to measure clinically. Planning using 3D reconstructions
             of CT data can offer significant benefits in these cases and facilitates
             accurate assessment of the true extent of any cant. Similarly, midline
             discrepancies can be accurately measured off the scan. This computer-​
             assisted planning leads to greater fidelity in the planning of surgical
             moves, especially in complex cases.
           • Computer-​aided design/​manufacturing (CAD/​CAM) techniques allow
             the construction of skeletal models from CT data by procedures such
             as stereolithography or fused surface deposition. Such models greatly
             assist in the visualization of the true extent and location of abnormality
             and can be used to facilitate surgical planning.
           • CAD/​CAM technology now allows surgical wafers to be constructed
             directly from ‘virtual’ surgical plans. These modern techniques
             potentially eliminate the need for model surgery. There is also the
             provision for fabricating preformed plates bent to accommodate the
             planned moves. This can potentially reduce operating times and improve
             accuracy, but a downside to these would be a degree of inflexibility
             limiting the adjustments a surgeon wants to make intraoperatively.
Treatment planning   233
234



      234    Chapter 5     Orthognathic surgery


            Presurgical orthodontics
            Orthodontic treatment carried out prior to jaw surgery to facilitate a cor-
            rect jaw position, usually achieved with fixed appliances, which allow precise
            positioning of teeth in all dimensions. Orthognathic surgery patients should
            be assessed in multidisciplinary joint clinics.
            The joint clinic
            • Successful surgical correction of jaw discrepancy involves a close
              working relationship between surgeon and orthodontist.
            • Patients should be assessed in joint clinics where an individualized
              treatment plan must be agreed with clear aesthetic and functional goals.
            • Radiographs, plaster models, and photographs must be available,
              including an appropriate tracing of lateral skull radiograph. Records are
              increasingly likely to be in digital format, simplifying access and storage.
              The development of 3D imaging and CBCT has advanced treatment
              planning with 3D planning possible using various software options.
            •	A problem list matched to patient concerns and expectations.
            • Consideration of ethnic facial morphology.
            •	Explain and record the risks vs benefits of treatment, and possible
              alternatives.
            • The index of treatment need (IOTN) and Index of Orthognathic
              Functional Treatment Need (IOFTN) are validated indices to assess the
              functional benefit of treatment.
            • It is important to provide information. The British Orthodontic Society
              (BOS) and the British Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons
              (BAOMS) provide usual information leaflets. The BOS website ‘Your
              Jaw Surgery’ (M https://​www.bos.org.uk/​Your-​Jaw-​Surgery) has
              interviews with patients and animations of surgical procedures, which
              can be used to reinforce information given in the consultation.
            • This is the first opportunity to commence the consent process, which
              should be well documented including the impact of no treatment;
              orthodontic alignment alone; and all options of surgical correction,
              including risks and benefits as per Montgomery consent, tailored to the
              patient including their lifestyle factors.
            Presurgical preparation (2–​8 months)
            High-​quality presurgical orthodontics is essential to obtaining good results
            from combined orthodontic/​surgical treatment. Presurgical orthodontics
            should facilitate the desired skeletal and soft tissue changes to be achieved
            by the planned surgical procedures.
                The aim of presurgical orthodontics is to eliminate any existing dental
            compensation and, hence, reveal the true jaw discrepancy in all three di-
            mensions. Dental movements aim to align and upright teeth with respect
            to each arch using a period of fixed appliance therapy that permits full 3D
            control of the teeth. If possible, tooth movements are planned in the op-
            posite direction to surgical movements to allow for postsurgical change, e.g.
            it is prudent that any presurgical orthodontic preparation increases rather
            than decreases any open bite present at the beginning of treatment. In this
            way, any orthodontic relapse will be in a beneficial rather than detrimental
            direction.
                                        Presurgical orthodontics                235


Presurgical orthodontics goals
• Relieve crowding.
• Level and align arches.
• Decompensate.
•	Allow stable arch coordination.
•	Achieve root divergence at the site of any segmental osteotomy.
Relieve crowding
• Crowding relieved by extractions, expansion, interproximal reduction,
  or a combination of approaches to achieve the presurgical objectives.
• Detailed analysis of space needed and discrepancies between tooth size
  and arch length carried out by the orthodontist.
Arch alignment
• Relief of crowding.
• Correction of rotations and occlusal interferences.
•	Arch expansion or extractions.
Levelling
• Commonly accompanies arch alignment in conventional orthodontics,
  but is not always desirable in surgical cases.
• By not levelling the arch and maintaining the curve of Spee, it is possible
  to achieve an increase in lower anterior face height when the mandible
  is advanced to a so-​called three-​point landing with occlusal contact on
  the incisors and molars (leaving lateral open bites, which are closed
  down postoperatively by over-​eruption and settling elastics).
• This movement is commonly adopted in Class II division 2 malocclusions
  and those with a reduced lower anterior face height.
Decompensation
• In patients with severe Class III discrepancies, the lower incisors are
  often retroclined and upper incisors are typically proclined.
• These incisor positions camouflage the underlying Class III jaw
  discrepancy (compensated Class III malocclusion).
• The upper jaw may be narrow with inclined upper molars. Correcting
  tooth positions will influence both AP and transverse relationships.
• The effect of a planned surgical move on the incisor angulation must
  also be borne in mind when planning the degree of decompensation.
• The anticipated surgical plan may impact on tooth extractions and the
  team must consider the role of limited decompensation to achieve
  better facial balance (i.e. not all cases need to be fully decompensated).
•	A differential posterior impaction of the maxilla is commonly carried
  out in open bite cases to upright the upper incisors. When this move is
  planned, it is desirable to leave the upper incisors proclined and achieve
  full decompensation surgically.
• When planning the degree of decompensation, the amount of labial
  bone is a key consideration. Thin labial bone may limit the degree of
  decompensation that can be achieved without moving the roots out of
  the available bone.
• It must be pointed out to patients that decompensation often
  exaggerates the pre-​existing deformity and, therefore, makes the
236



      236    Chapter 5     Orthognathic surgery

              malocclusion look worse as the presurgical orthodontics progresses.
              This effect is generally more obvious in Class III patients with an increase
              in reverse overjet and apparently greater chin prominence.
            • In Class II cases, lower incisor proclination and upper incisor
              retroclination can be present providing camouflage to the underlying
              skeletal pattern. Decompensation involves uprighting upper and lower
              incisors with a resulting increase in the overjet as the movements occur.
            • Transverse dimension:
              • transverse decompensation of inclined molars is common. The upper
                 jaw may be narrow with buccal inclined upper molars and the lower
                 arch attempts to compensate naturally with lingual inclined molars.
                 Pre-​adjusted orthodontic appliances and rectangular wires can upright
                 these molars to express a much larger discrepancy in transverse
                 dimension than first appears at the assessment;
              • postsurgical change in tooth positions following surgical correction
                 can influence both AP and transverse relationships;
              • it is important to consider if orthodontic appliances alone can achieve
                 a stable transverse correction. Orthodontic expansion alone is limited
                 to 5mm transverse discrepancy;
              • for greater transverse discrepancies stable correction requires
                 a combined surgical expansion (either by SARPE or segmental
                 osteotomy) along with the orthodontics;
              • a surgical option may also be indicated if dental expansion risks
                 periodontal health.
            At the end of presurgical preparation, study models, radiographs, and
            photographs are used to agree the final surgical plan. It is important to
            consider:
            • What will the incisor inclination be, post surgery?
            •	Are changes in occlusal plane likely?
            • Is maxillary width sufficient to accept the postoperative position of the
              mandible?
            • Is surgical overcorrection planned?
            Prior to surgery the orthodontist must ensure that:
            • The overjet allows appropriate AP movement of upper and or lower
              jaw to achieve the desired aesthetic as well as occlusal result.
            • Incisors are in the planned position.
            •	Arches are coordinated to create compatible intercanine widths with
              coincident centrelines.
            •	Arches are stabilized with large rectangular archwire (minimum 09 ×
              025-​inch stainless steel) 4–​6 weeks prior to surgery.
            • Surgical hooks are attached to the archwire to aid surgical IMF and
              postsurgical elastic traction.
Presurgical orthodontics   237
238



      238    Chapter 5     Orthognathic surgery


            Postsurgical orthodontics
            Immediate review with the surgeon following operative intervention is im-
            portant to plan the postsurgical phase of treatment. Teeth move rapidly in
            the postoperative phase and intermaxillary elastics can be used to refine
            jaw position. Initially, light elastics can be used and the patient reviewed at
            weekly intervals. It is important to consider force and direction.
               After 6 weeks, postsurgical orthodontic detailing commences. Usually,
            heavy rectangular archwires are replaced with lighter settling wires and
            intermaxillary elastics to fine-​tune the occlusion.
               Postsurgical orthodontics should be completed by 6–​2 months post
            surgery. Long-​term retention is facilitated with removable retainers or, on
            occasion, with the aid of fixed retainers.
Postsurgical orthodontics   239
240



      240    Chapter 5     Orthognathic surgery


            Surgical management
            Timing of surgery
            • Orthognathic surgical treatment is usually carried out at any time after
              the cessation of growth (prevents unfavourable postoperative change
              taking place as a result of further jaw growth).
            • Growth usually ceases at the age of 7 in ♀ and 8 in ♂ (see
              % Growth spurts, p. 213).
            • If growth has ceased, or there are extenuating social or psychological
              circumstances, consideration may be given to earlier surgery.
            • In cases of condylar hyperplasia or asymmetrical growth, early
              intervention may be considered to reduce secondary occlusal changes.
            Preoperative assessment
            • Routine haematological investigations should include a full blood count.
            • Some units will recommend grouping and saving blood in maxillary
              surgery (although it is exceedingly rare these days for patients to require
              blood transfusions).
            • Other preoperative tests are ordered only if specifically indicated on the
              basis of the patient’s medical history.
            Intraoperative management and anaesthetic considerations
            The following points to be borne in mind while anaesthetizing patients for
            orthognathic surgery:
            •	Hypotensive anaesthesia.
            •	Head end up while operating.
            • Systolic BP under 90 mmHg when maxillary down fracture.
            • Restoring BP prior to closure and achieving haemostasis.
            • Pain management with 0.5% Marcaine® infiltration and blocks.
            •	Analgesia postoperatively.
            Perioperative management
            •	Antibiotic prophylaxis.
            • Steroids: various regimens exist. One of the commonly used one
              involves dexamethasone 8mg IV intraoperative followed by two
              postoperative doses.
            • DVT prophylaxis (intraoperative TED stockings and Flowtron® garments
              + postoperative Flowtron® garments and early mobilization). Some
              units also use pharmacological agents postoperatively (low-​molecular-​
              weight heparin (LMWH)—​dalteparin), but this must be weighed up
              against risk of bleeding and swelling.
            • Some advocate antifibrinolytics, e.g. tranexamic acid (both in the form
              of topical (soaked in gauze) intraoperatively and IV). This must be
              weighed up in terms of procoagulant risk including DVT.
            • Minimize intraoperative blood loss (also aids operative field):
              • use of LA;
              • patient positioned with head end up;
              • careful handling of soft tissues;
              • cutting diathermy;
              • hypotensive anaesthesia (may help to reduce postoperative oedema).
                                              Surgical management              241


Postoperative care
• The advent of miniplate fixation means that rigid IMF is not required
  postoperatively. Benefits patients in terms of airway management, early
  function, and comfort.
• Most surgeons, however, advocate some form of IMF, often in the form
  of light guiding elastics.
•	Nursing in the immediate postoperative period is usually on a head and
  neck specialist ward and invasive monitoring is not generally required.
•	Use of cooling masks (which allow circulation of cold water at 6–​
  8°C) affords good patient comfort and reduces postoperative swelling.
• Some amount of epistaxis can occur post maxillary surgery, but this
  should be easily controlled with nasal bolsters or anterior nasal packing.
24



     242    Chapter 5       Orthognathic surgery


           Maxillary procedures
           Maxillary osteotomies are based on the Le Fort fracture lines. Unlike frac-
           tures, however, osteotomies terminate at the posterior maxillary wall and
           aim to separate the pterygoid plates from the posterior maxilla (fracture
           lines run across the plates, see Fig. 5.8).
           Le Fort I
           • The most popular of all the maxillary orthognathic procedures.
           • Total maxillary osteotomy sectioning through the lateral walls of the
             maxillary sinus and lateral wall of the nose just above the apices of the
             teeth (Fig. 5.9).
           • The nasal septum is divided from the maxillary crest.
           • Once mobilized, the maxilla can be repositioned in three dimensions:
             • anteriorly;
             • posteriorly (less common);
             • superiorly;
             • inferiorly;
             • rotated or moved bodily to right or left.
           •	After down-​fracture modifications of the procedure allow for
             segmentalization of the maxilla to correct discrepancies of width,
             occlusal plane, or dentoalveolar relations.




           Fig. 5.8 Le Fort I bone cuts in vitro.
                                                    Maxillary procedures              243




Fig. 5.9 Operative view of the lateral bone cut of a Le Fort I maxillary osteotomy.

Exposure
• Via a sulcus incision, from first premolar to first premolar on the other
  side and minimal soft tissue dissection is being advocated to minimize
  swelling.
• (There has also been minimally invasive Le Fort I described with an
  incision done from lateral incisor to lateral incisor on the other side and
  much of the lateral aspects of surgery done by tunnelling.)
• Incision is curved upwards slightly as it approaches the zygomatic
  buttress, prevents damage to the buccal/​labial soft tissue pedicle of the
  maxilla.
• Identification of the zygomatic buttress, infraorbital nerve (some
  techniques involve minimal dissection and not exposing the nerve, unless
  performing a high-​level osteotomy), and piriform aperture.
• Posteriorly the dissection continues subperiosteally to enter the
  pterygopalatine fissure.
• Dissection of the floor of the nose.
• Vascular supply to the down-​fractured maxilla is largely via the buccal
  soft tissue pedicle and to a smaller extent through the greater palatine
  artery on both sides. The latter can be sacrificed especially in cases of
  big posterior impaction, which require bone trimming in that region.
Bone cuts
• Some surgeons place a K-​wire or a screw in the nasal dorsum to act as
  an external reference point for vertical movements, while others use
  internal markers on the maxilla.
• Bone cut runs from the posterior aspect of the zygomatic buttress at
  a point 5mm above the apices of the teeth forwards across the lateral
  wall of the maxillary sinus to cross the lateral rim just above the base of
  the piriform aperture (Fig. 5.0).
24



     244    Chapter 5       Orthognathic surgery




           Fig. 5.0 Fixation of Le Fort I maxillary osteotomy with miniplates at the piriform
           aperture and the zygomatic buttress.

           • Completion of the bony cuts requires:
             • division of the lateral nasal walls;
             • separation of nasal septum from the maxillary crest;
             • pterygomaxillary dysjunction (can be done using the pterygoid chisels
                or using the minimal pressure spreader technique placed in the
                posterior zygomatic buttress region).
           • Down-​fracture.
           • Mobilization.
           • Trimming of bony interferences.
           • Insertion of wafer and IMF.
           • Fixation.
           Le Fort I variants
           Le Fort I with midline expansion
           • Orthodontic preparation provides space between the roots of the
             central incisors.
           • The maxilla is divided anteriorly in the midline between the incisor teeth.
           • Division is continued in midline or preferably in a U-​shape:
             • a cut is made in the palate running from the region of the greater
                palatine foramen on one side, round anteriorly to the foramen on the
                opposite side;
             • palatal mucosa is thinnest and tightly bound down to the underlying
                bone in the midline, and it is easy to perforate this mucosa with the
                possibility of subsequent fistula;
             • adherent nature of the midline mucosa also limits the amount of bony
                separation and hence expansion that can be achieved;
                                                 Maxillary procedures              245

  • ‘horseshoe’ osteotomy places the bony cut in the region of the lateral
    palatal mucosa, which is thicker and more fibro-​fatty in texture,
    making perforation less likely; as this mucosa is less adherent to the
    underlying bone a greater degree of expansion can be obtained
    (Fig. 5.);
  • fixation is unchanged for these cases, but the expansion should
    be supported with an auxiliary archwire or an acrylic plate to
    maintain width.
Subspinal osteotomy
This technique is useful for patients with an upturned nose, the maxilla can
be advanced, leaving the anterior nasal spine in its original position.

(a)




(b)




Fig. 5. (a) Schematic illustration of the parasagittal cuts of a horseshoe
osteotomy. (b) Operative view from above of a horseshoe osteotomy of the palate.
246



      246    Chapter 5     Orthognathic surgery

               The access and approach is the same as for Le Fort I, but the cuts are
            below the floor of the nose, avoiding apices of upper incisor teeth; nasal
            trimming and nasal septal adjustments are still required based on the move-
            ments to be achieved.
            Surgically assisted rapid palatal expansion
            •	An adjunctive surgical procedure to widen the maxilla—​a Le Fort
              I osteotomy without down-​fracture.
            • Form of distraction osteogenesis.
            • Indicated in patients in whom the mid-​palatal suture has fused (at
              around 4 years of age) and who are thus not suitable for rapid palatal
              expansion by orthodontic means alone.
            • Incision of mucosa can be made similar to Le Fort I or some centres use
              a minimally invasive horizontal buccal incision 2–​4 and a small vertical
              midline incision between the central incisors.
            • The bony cuts are made in an identical fashion to a Le Fort
              I osteotomy—​the pterygoid plates may be left attached or separated.
            • The maxilla is split in the midline.
            •	Expansion of the maxilla is achieved by a tooth or bone-​borne palatal
              expansion device (TPD = transpalatal distractor, Fig. 5.2a; bone-​borne
              distractor, Fig. 5.2b).
            •	Activation of the device begins after a latent period of 3–​5 days and the
              maxilla is widened ~mm per day until the desired increase in width is
              obtained.
            Stepped Le Fort I
            • The lateral wall of the maxilla can be cut in a stepped fashion, rather
              than a simple horizontal osteotomy as is the norm (Fig. 5.3).
            • Modification was described by Wolford and results in advancement of
              the paranasal area at a higher level than the standard osteotomy.
            • The step also provides a reference point to measure horizontal advance,
              and a further site for potential fixation or bone grafting, should this be
              required.
            Segmental maxillary procedures
            Historically, a wide variety of segmental maxillary procedures have been de-
            scribed mostly with eponymous names, such as Wassmund and Wunderer
            (anterior segmental osteotomies), or Schuchardt’s buccal segment oste-
            otomy. These procedures all have in common surgical approaches through
            limited incisions. With experience and understanding of the blood supply,
            these procedures are largely obsolete, with the majority of surgeons per-
            forming segmental maxillary osteotomies via a Le Fort I down-​fracture
            technique.
            Indications
            • Transverse discrepancies.
            • Vertical discrepancies.
            •	Asymmetry.
            • Severe open bite deformity.
            •	Accentuated occlusal curves, which cannot be levelled orthodontically.
            • Severe bi-​maxillary protrusion.
            •	Elimination of spacing within an arch.
                                                    Maxillary procedures                 247


(a)




(b)




Fig. 5.2 (a) Tooth-​borne expansion device for surgically assisted rapid palatal
expansion. (b) Bone-​borne expansion device for surgically assisted rapid palatal
expansion. The lateral wall cut begins conventionally in the posterior maxilla, but is
continued anteriorly only as far forward as the molar region at which point a vertical
component is introduced. The horizontal cut then continues anteriorly to the piriform
aperture at a higher level.
248



      248    Chapter 5          Orthognathic surgery




            Fig. 5.3 The lateral maxillary cut of a stepped Le Fort  osteotomy, showing the
            anterior maxilla being sectioned at a higher level.
            Reproduced with permission from Ward-​Booth et al. (2007). Maxillofacial Surgery, Vol. 2, Churchill
            Livingstone, with permission from Elsevier.

            Technique
            • Segmentation of the maxilla requires interdental osteotomies to be performed.
            • Maxilla may be divided into several segments if required.
            •	Anterior segmental surgery is the most common form, generally
              employed in the management of severe open bite deformity.
            • Interdental osteotomy is most commonly carried out in the canine/​first
              premolar region, or between the canine and lateral incisor.
            • If the labial segment is being set-​back, a premolar may be extracted and
              the extraction space closed by retraction of the anterior segment.
            • The interdental osteotomy is carried out from above following down-​
              fracture of the maxilla using fine burs or micro-​saws.
            • Orthodontic preparation facilitates these osteotomies by diverging the
              roots of the adjacent teeth and providing space (Fig. 5.4a).
            • When the down-​fracture technique is employed, the blood supply of
              the segment is derived primarily from the palatal mucosa and great care
              must be taken to preserve this.
            • Tears may lead to localized periodontal defects, tooth loss, or even
              avascular necrosis of a segment.
            • Segmental surgery requires greater attention to stabilization and an
              acrylic occlusal wafer is used to tie in the segments at the occlusal level
              (Fig. 5.4b).
            • The orthodontic archwire must be sectioned at the time of surgery to allow
              for positioning of the segment, and should be replaced either with a new
              archwire pre-​bent on the model surgery, or with a supplemental archwire.
            Le Fort II
            Indications
            •	Nasomaxillary hypoplasia.
            • Mild deficiency of the infraorbital rim.
            • Pseudo-​proptosis.
                                                    Maxillary procedures                249


        (a)




        (b)




Fig. 5.4 (a) Orthodontic preparation of a patient with a large anterior open bite
for an anterior segmental osteotomy. Note the step in the occlusal level between
the lateral incisor and canine, and also the reverse curve of Spee in the lower arch.
(b) The completed osteotomy showing levelling of the occlusal plane and the fixation
of the segments.

The procedure is less versatile than a Le Fort I osteotomy. Anterior move-
ment with a degree of downward rotation of the maxilla is possible, but
impaction of the maxilla and rotation to any significant extent cannot be
achieved. Unlike the Le Fort III osteotomy, this cannot be combined with a
Le Fort I osteotomy.
Exposure
• Intraoral exposure is as for a Le Fort I osteotomy with a sulcus incision
  running from first molar to first molar.
• Two para-​nasal or ‘Lynch’ incisions gain access to:
  • nasal bones;
  • upper anterior maxilla;
  • orbital rim;
  • medial orbit.
250



      250    Chapter 5     Orthognathic surgery

            • The skin is raised subperiosteally over the glabellar region.
            • The lacrimal apparatus must be identified and protected with vessel
              sloops passed around the lacrimal ducts.
            Bone cuts
            • Pyramidal osteotomy of the midface.
            • Posterior aspect identical to a Le Fort I osteotomy from the pterygoid
              region forward to the zygomatic buttress.
            • From this point the bony cut passes upwards to the orbital rim medially
              to the infraorbital nerve.
            •	After crossing the orbital rim, the cut runs posteriorly across the orbital
              floor at right angles to the rim, before turning medially to run behind the
              lacrimal sac as far as the upper part of the lacrimal groove.
            • The cut turns forwards to cross the frontal process of the maxilla and
              the nasal bridge, becoming continuous with the contralateral side.
            • The nasal septum is divided at a higher level than in a Le Fort I running
              from the nasal bones downward and backwards towards the posterior
              part of the septum at the posterior nasal spine (Fig. 5.5).
            • Down-​fracture.
            • Mobilization of the Le Fort II is more difficult and much less mobility
              is obtained than with a Le Fort I because of the larger size of the
              maxillary block.
            • Fixation.
            •	Achieved with miniplates at the zygomatic buttress and across the nasal
              bridge. The bony defect at the nasal osteotomy can be grafted with a
              corticocancellous block.
            Modifications of the Le Fort II
            Pyramidal naso-​orbital osteotomy
            • Limited to the anterior maxilla.
            • Combines the upper part of a Le Fort II along with an anterior maxillary
              osteotomy.
            •	Anterior midface is moved anteriorly en bloc maintaining the posterior
              occlusion and opening space in usually the premolar region.
            Kufner osteotomy
            • Cuts do not involve the nasal bridge and run anterior to the lacrimal
              apparatus crossing the upper part of the piriform aperture medially.
            • Osteotomy runs laterally across the zygoma and down the
              posterolateral aspect of the maxilla to the pterygoid region.
            • Indicated in patients with a good nasal bridge projection, but in whom
              the infraorbital rims and maxilla are retruded.
            ‘Winged’ Le Fort I
            • Often confused with a Kufner or used synonymously.
            • The ‘winged’ Le Fort I osteotomy divides the maxilla at a higher level
              than a conventional Le Fort I osteotomy and extends laterally onto the
              body of the zygomatic bone (Fig. 5.6).
                                               Maxillary procedures          251




Fig. 5.5 Bony cuts in Le Fort II osteotomy.

Le Fort III
• Described by Tessier in 97.
• Le Fort III advances the entire facial mass by separating it from the
  cranial base.
• Indications for this procedure lie in craniofacial surgery.
•	Advances the maxilla and simultaneously increases orbital volume.
• Osteotomy cuts pass across:
  • medial orbital wall;
  • orbital floor;
  • lateral orbital wall;
  • frontozygomatic suture.
• The frontal process of the zygomatic bone is split sagittally and
  continued inferiorly to complete the division of the zygoma.
• The two sides are connected in the midline through the frontonasal area
  as per a Le Fort II.
• Pterygomaxillary and septal separation are also as for a Le Fort II.
• See % Craniofacial procedures, p. 300.
Alternatives to high level maxillary osteotomies
• These include Le Fort I with adjuncts such as infraorbital and zygomatic
  implants.
25



     252    Chapter 5       Orthognathic surgery

                    (a)




                    (b)




           Fig. 5.6 (a, b) Illustration and operative view of a ‘winged’ Le Fort I osteotomy.
Maxillary procedures   253
254



      254    Chapter 5     Orthognathic surgery


            Mandibular procedures
            Osteotomies have been described at almost every part of the mandible in
            order to achieve forward, backward, or rotational repositioning.
            Bilateral sagittal split osteotomy
            The bilateral sagittal split osteotomy (BSSO) of the mandible is the work-
            horse of mandibular orthognathic surgery. It can be used to:
            •	Advance or set-​back the mandible.
            • Correct rotations and other asymmetric adjustments.
            • Close small open bite deformities by rotation of the mandible in a
              counter-​clockwise direction around a sagittal split, utilizing bicortical
              screws as fixation.
            • Introduced in 957 by Trauner and Obwegeser.
            • In the original description, the split was confined to the vertical ramus
              with two parallel horizontal cuts—​one buccal and one lingual.
            • Subsequent modifications have been described by Dal Pont, Epker, and
              Hunsuck:
              • Dal Pont brought the buccal cut to a vertical position in the molar
                 region, thus increasing the area of bone contact for healing;
              •	Hunsuck described the short split whereby the horizontal lingual
                 cut is extended posteriorly to a point just behind the lingula. This
                 latter modification prevents the lingual aspect of the distal fragment
                 impinging in the pterygomasseteric sling in large mandibular set-​backs.
                 It also makes it less likely that the condyle will remain on the distal
                 fragment during splitting of the osteotomy (Fig. 5.7).
            •	A natural cleavage plane between buccal and lingual cortical plates is
              utilized to develop a sagittal split separating the proximal (condylar-​
              carrying) and distal (dentoalveolar) fragments.
            • Following splitting of the cortical plates the distal fragment can be
              advanced, set-​back, or rotated.
            • If advanced, a gap is produced in the buccal cortical plate and, if set-​
              back, a portion of buccal cortical plate has to be removed. The proximal
              fragment remains in its preoperative AP position, but may rotate a small
              amount around a vertical axis.
            Exposure
            • Intraoral incision options:
              • straight incision extending down the external oblique ridge and
                 running forward in the buccal sulcus to a point roughly adjacent to the
                 first molar tooth;
              • conventional third molar incision where the incision runs into the
                 distobuccal aspect of the terminal molar;
              • in either case a cuff of mucosa is left to facilitate suturing.
            • The incision is carried straight down to bone. The vertical extent up the
              external oblique ridge is limited to avoid the buccal fat pad.
            •	As the flap is developed posterosuperiorly, a notched ramus retractor is
              introduced, and used to strip the soft tissue attachment off the external
              oblique ridge and anterior edge of the ascending ramus.
            •	At this point the temporalis insertion is encountered and must be
              stripped upwards to a point above the level of the lingual.
                                                      Mandibular procedures       255




Fig. 5.7 Sagittal split osteotomy as most commonly performed, showing long
buccal cut and short lingual split (Hunsuck).
Reproduced with permission of Professor K. F. Moos.

•	A Kocher’s forceps may be applied to the anterior edge of the ramus to
  act as a retractor.
• The lingual soft tissues are now dissected with a thin periosteal retractor
  being introduced sub-​subperiosteally to permit identification of the lingula
  (a nerve hook or Mitchell’s trimmer with its sharp end facing downwards
  and angled slightly forwards is a useful means by which to reliably identify
  the position of the lingula). The assistant on the opposite side of the
  patient often gets a better view of the lingula than the operator.
Bone cuts
• Surgical bur (Lindemann or Toller fissure) or reciprocating saw.
• Perform lingual cut first.
• The bur or saw is placed against the lingual side of the mandible just
  above the level of the lingua and with the tip just posterior to it. Some
  advocate taking this cut close to the posterior border of the ramus but
  stopping short of it by 5mm. This reduces the risk of a bad split leaving
  the condylar head on the distal segment. But care must be exercised not
  to extend the cut fully to the posterior border.
• The lingual cortex cut is then continued down the external oblique
  ridge—​the latter can first be delineated in ‘postage stamp’ fashion.
• The anterior extent of this latter cut depends on whether the mandible
  is being advanced or set-​back, and also, to a certain extent, upon what
  type of fixation is envisaged. The greater the advance, then the further
  forward the buccal cut needs to be in order to achieve good bony
  overlap of the fragments (the longer the split, the greater may be the
  technical difficulty in achieving it).
256



      256    Chapter 5     Orthognathic surgery

            • The final cut is the vertical buccal cut, which runs from the anterior end
              of the external oblique cut downwards, parallel to the long axis of the
              teeth, to cross the lower border. The cut must be deep enough to fully
              perforate the buccal cortex remembering that, at some point on the
              buccal surface, the inferior alveolar nerve is at risk of transection.
            • CBCT can pick up anatomical variations in which the ID nerve runs very
              buccally.
            • Some advocate taking the buccal cut angled backwards, so that as
              it reaches the lower border, the split will lie behind the insertion of
              masseter. The theoretical advantage of this being any steps between
              overlapping fragments is masked by soft tissue. Also if there is
              resorption in that region, it again happens under the masseteric
              insertion.
            •	Ensure that the full thickness of the cortical bone is divided at the lower
              border; removing mouth props and using a channel or Awty retractor
              greatly assists in achieving this. Failure to divide the lower border is the
              commonest cause of a ‘bad’ or unfavourable split.
            Splitting
            •	A fine curved chisel is placed into the lingual cut and tapped backwards
              until the tip emerges from the lingual cortex just behind the lingula.
            • This manoeuvre begins a split propagating down the lingual cortex of
              the mandible and minimizes the chance of leaving the condyle on the
              wrong fragment.
            • Completion of all the bony cuts is confirmed by tapping a fine
              osteotome along all the cuts. Tapping out the cuts in such a fashion
              often begins the process of splitting such that the cortical plates can be
              seen to separate.
            •	A Smith’s spreader at the upper border in conjunction with a Howarth’s
              periosteal elevator or chisel at the lower border, working strictly from
              anterior to posterior, separates the two cortices.
            • The shorter the distance between the two instruments, the less the
              leverage that needs to be applied to the buccal plate, thus minimizing
              the chance of fracture.
            • The split is thus completed from front to back.
            • The two common points of hold-​up are anteriorly at the lower border
              and posteriorly, low down at the angle.
            • Once the split has been achieved, the proximal and distal fragments
              can be easily moved independently of each other. One must be able to
              obtain shortening of the ramus.
            • The position of the nerve must be checked. It should lie on the distal
              fragment, but often lies entrapped in the buccal aspect of the proximal
              fragment crossing the osteotomy gap and, at this point, must be
              dissected free.
            Fixation
            Plates or bicortical screws (Fig. 5.8a):
            • Fixation by means of bicortical screws is more rigid and thus less
               forgiving than plates in terms of any postoperative adjustment.
            • Plates have a higher removal rate.
            • Bicortical fixation is by means of position screws and not lag screws
               (lag screws by only engaging on the lingual cortex provide compression
                                                      Mandibular procedures             257


    (a)




                                              (b)




Fig. 5.8 (a) Bicortical screw fixation of sagittal split osteotomy, showing the most
mechanically advantageous arrangement of three screws in a tripod fashion. (b) Plate
fixation of sagittal split osteotomy.
Reproduced with permission of Professor K. F. Moos.

    between the fragments and have been associated with a greater
    incidence of nerve damage).
•   Three screws are placed in an ‘L’ or triangular configuration or in a linear
    fashion along the upper border. Some advocate the placement of four
    bicortical screws when operating for sleep apnoea—​these patients are
    often of a stockier build and may generate high bite forces.
•   It is important not to compress the plates while placing position screws
    to avoid external torquing of the condyle. Therefore, using some
    ‘spacer’ between the fragments is advised while placing the screws.
•   IMF in the desired occlusal position is required prior to fixation.
•   Positioning of the proximal fragment requires experience and is largely
    determined by ‘feel’—​the condyle must be fully seated in the glenoid fossa.
Vertical subsigmoid osteotomy
• The vertical subsigmoid osteotomy (VSS) is one of the simplest
  osteotomies of the mandible.
• It became less widely used with the introduction of semi-​rigid fixation,
  when patients were no longer routinely placed in IMF postoperatively
  (VSS requires IMF during the healing phase).
• With current technology it is now possible to fix these osteotomies
  intraorally and obviate the need for IMF.
• In theory eliminates the risk of inferior alveolar nerve damage that
  accompanies sagittal splitting.
•	Has been shown it to be more stable than sagittal splitting for
  mandibular set-​back.
258



      258    Chapter 5      Orthognathic surgery

            • May be indicated where appropriate in patients with pre-​existing TMJ
              problems.
            • Can be carried out either extra-​or intraorally (in both cases bone cuts
              are the same; Fig. 5.9).
            Indications
            • Mandibular excess where set-​back is required.
            • Relieving osteotomy to allow rotations of the mandible (when
              used in this fashion it may be combined with a sagittal split on the
              contralateral side).
            Informed consent
            For consent to be truly informed and valid, not only should the procedure
            and its attendant complications be explained to the patient in detail, but
            such alternative procedures that are available should also be discussed. One
            can argue a very strong case that a patient requiring a mandibular set-​back
            should have the advantages and disadvantages of both a BSSO and a VSS
            explained to them and be offered a choice. Not only is the incidence of
            nerve damage lower with a VSS, but there is evidence that for set-​back it is
            more stable than a BSSO.
            Exposure—​extraoral
            •	Approached via a standard submandibular skin crease incision.
            •	Entire lateral surface of the ramus is exposed subperiosteally.
            • Muscle attachments at the posterior border are not stripped in order to
              maintain blood supply.
            • Sigmoid notch is identified and a long channel retractor inserted into it.
            •	Anti-​lingula is identified (represents the point behind which the bony cut
              must be made).
            Exposure—​intraoral
            • Perhaps more than any other osteotomy procedure, this benefits from
              specially designed instrumentation to gain adequate access and exposure.




            Fig. 5.9 Vertical subsigmoid osteotomy bone cut.
                                             Mandibular procedures              259


• Incision is the same as that for a sagittal split.
• Periosteum is incised along the external oblique ridge of the ramus and
  the lateral aspect of the ramus is exposed subperiosteally.
•	Anti-​lingula is identified.
Bone cut
• Vertical cut running from the sigmoid notch above downwards to cross
  the lower border at a point just anterior to the angle.
• If the procedure is being carried out via an extraoral approach this cut is
  easily made under direct vision with a reciprocating saw.
• The intraoral approach:
  • technically challenging;
  • requires the use of an oscillating saw;
  • cut is started at the mid-​point of the ramus just behind the anti-​
     lingula, then extended upwards to the sigmoid notch and downwards
     to the lower border.
• When the bone cut is completed, a periosteal elevator is introduced
  into the cut and the proximal fragment mobilized laterally to overlap the
  distal fragment.
•	Any remaining medial pterygoid muscle attachments are stripped from
  the medial aspect of this fragment.
Fixation
• Temporary IMF is used to position the fragments.
• Traditionally IMF is used postoperatively.
•	A suture is placed through a hole drilled in the lower part of the
   proximal fragment and sutured to the buccal periosteum to prevent
   medial displacement.
• IMF is maintained for first 2 weeks, followed by strong elastics.
• It is possible to fix this osteotomy either by means of a bicortical screw
   placed via a transbuccal trocar, or to plate the fragments using a right-​
   angled screwdriver.
Inverted-​L osteotomy
The inverted-​L osteotomy is a variant of the VSS (Fig. 5.20).
Indications
• Mandibular hypoplasia where there is significant deficiency of the ramus,
  both vertically and horizontally.
• To increase posterior facial height as it allows lengthening of the ramus
  without significant effects on the masticatory muscles.
• ‘Bird-​face’ deformities are often best treated by this procedure.
• The procedure can be used as an alternative to either VSS or BSSO,
  where intraoral access is severely limited.
• In most cases bone grafting is required.
Technique
•	Extraoral or intraoral approach may be used.
•	Extraoral approach offers greater access and allows for easier
  positioning of bone grafts and application of fixation.
• Fixation with miniplates (if an intraoral approach is employed, this can
  still be achieved with a transbuccal technique or using a right-​angled
  screwdriver).
260



      260    Chapter 5          Orthognathic surgery




            Fig. 5.20 Inverted L osteotomy.
            Reproduced from Ward-​Booth et al. (2007). Maxillofacial Surgery, Vol. 2, Churchill Livingstone, with
            permission from Elsevier.

            Total subapical osteotomy
            Indications
            Good facial profile with the chin in the desired AP position relative to the
            cranial base, but anterior positioning of the entire lower dentition is required
            (sagittal advancement of the mandible would render the patient prognathic
            and addition of reduction genioplasty results in a flat, featureless chin).
            Exposure
            • Sulcus incision is carried from one external oblique ridge to another,
              maintaining a wide cuff of mucosa at least cm from the mucogingival junction.
            • Mental foramen identified bilaterally.
            Nerve dissection
            • ID nerve must be dissected free in order to safely carry out the
              osteotomy (Fig. 5.2).
            • Dissection of the nerve begins at the mental foramen.
            •	A series of small perforations are placed around the foramen with a fine
              bur in postage stamp fashion to form a circumferential osteotomy—​this
              ring of bone is then divided and removed.
            • The nerve can then be traced posteriorly by removing a parallel portion
              of cortical bone overlying the canal.
            • The nerve is traced backwards until the ramus at which point it
              traverses the mandible from a buccal to a lingual position as it
              approaches the lingua.
            Bone cuts
            • Once the nerve is dissected free, the bone cut is completed.
            •	No lingual dissection is performed, but a finger placed in the lingual
              sulcus as the cut is made avoids damage to the mucosa.
            • The horizontal transverse cut is taken into a vertical cut as the posterior
              body joins the ramus.
            • Mobilization of the entire dentoalveolar segment is relatively simple.
                                                   Mandibular procedures               261




Fig. 5.2 Exteriorization of inferior alveolar nerve from its canal prior to a total
subapical osteotomy.

Fixation
• Fixation of the dentoalveolar segment to the basal bone of the mandible
   is by means of plates and screws.
• Bone graft may be placed in the osteotomy site and an increase in lower
   face height achieved by interpositional grafting.
• The amount of advancement that may be achieved is limited by the thickness
   of the bone, as direct bone-​to-​bone contact is required for healing.
Segmental mandibular osteotomies
A wide variety of segmental mandibular procedures have been described,
the principles of which will be outlined. For detailed descriptions of indica-
tions and techniques, specialist texts should be consulted.
Body ostectomy
• These osteotomies are carried out in the mandibular body either
  anterior or posterior to the mental foramen (Fig. 5.22).
• If posterior to the mental foramen, the nerve has to be dissected free
  from its bony canal and exteriorized to avoid damage to the nerve.
•	A preplanned segment of bone is removed, either to close an
  edentulous space or following extraction (usually a premolar), allowing
  the anterior segment of the jaw to be set-​back.
• 3D skeletal models can be particularly useful in planning these cases,
  cutting templates may be constructed.
• The proximal segments often rotate internally somewhat to narrow the
  posterior occlusion.
Lower labial segmental osteotomies
•	Have in common the separation of a segment of labial bone carrying
  the lower anterior teeth generally from canine to canine, or first
  premolar to first premolar.
• Blood supply to the fragment is derived from the lingual soft tissue
  attachments and it is crucial that these are not compromised during the
  procedure.
26



     262    Chapter 5          Orthognathic surgery




           Fig. 5.22 Body ostectomy. A premolar tooth has been removed to allow removal
           of a section of the body and the anterior mandible is set-​back.
           Reproduced with permission from Ward-​Booth et al. (2007). Maxillofacial Surgery, Vol. 2, Churchill
           Livingstone, with permission from Elsevier.

           • Lower labial segment may be repositioned vertically (to close an open
             bite), inferiorly or posteriorly.
           • Inferior and posterior repositioning require the removal of a portion of bone.
           • Posterior repositioning is often at the expense of the extraction of a
             premolar tooth.
           • Where vertical alveolar osteotomies are carried out between teeth, it
             is essential that orthodontic preparation opens sufficient space between
             the roots of the teeth.
           • Indications:
             • some cases of anterior open bite;
             • exaggerated curve of Spee;
             • reverse curve of Spee;
             • inferior alveolar protrusion;
             • some cases of bimaxillary protrusion.

           Kohle procedure
           •	Used in Class III patients with:
             • reverse curve of Spee;
             • downward inclination of the mandibular occlusal plane;
             • increase in lower anterior face height.
                                                      Mandibular procedures   263


• Procedure includes an anterior segmental osteotomy in conjunction with
  a genioplasty.
• The gap created by the upward movement of the lower labial segment
  is closed by using the wedge of bone removed from the genioplasty.
Sowray–​Haskell procedure
• Indicated when there is a degree of mandibular protrusion and an
  associated molar cross bite (Fig. 5.23).
• Procedure combines:
  • lower labial segmental osteotomy—​often with extraction of
    premolars to allow setting-​back of the labial segment;
  • narrowing of the mandible—​achieved by removing a midline segment
    of bone from the subapical osteotomy line to the lower border of the
    mandible.




Fig. 5.23 ‘Sowray–​Haskell’ procedure. This combines an anterior segmental
osteotomy with removal of a section of bone from the midline to narrow the
mandible.
Reproduced with permission of Professor K. F. Moos.
264



      264    Chapter 5     Orthognathic surgery


            Genioplasty
            Genioplasty may be performed either as a solitary procedure or as an ad-
            junct to other orthognathic or craniofacial procedures. The chin may be:
            •	Advanced or set-​back in the AP plane.
            •	Augmented or reduced in its vertical dimension.
            • Rotated to the left or right to correct a centre line discrepancy.
            • Widened or narrowed in the transverse dimension.
            •	Altered in all three dimensions in cases of asymmetry combinations.
            Beware the set-​back genioplasty! This procedure if not very carefully
            planned may result in poor aesthetic outcomes as a result of flattening of
            the labiomental groove producing a flat, featureless-​looking chin.
            Surgical technique
            Incision
            •	A wide labial approach avoiding the depth of sulcus running from the
               region of the canine/​first premolar tooth bilaterally.
            • Incision is made in a slightly bevelled fashion with either a scalpel or a
               needle point diathermy.
            • Incision is deepened through the mucosa, submucosal tissues, and the
               mentalis muscle to reach the periosteum.
            • The periosteum is incised initially in the midline and subperiosteal
               dissection is carried out on either side to reach the lower border of the
               mandible.
            • Dissection is continued posteriorly along the lower border beneath
               the mental nerve foramen allowing identification and protection of the
               nerves to a point, which corresponds to the posterior extent of the
               proposed bony osteotomy.
            • In the region of the midline, it is not necessary to fully expose the lower
               border of the chin point. Superior aesthetics can be achieved if some
               mentalis attachment is preserved.
            Bone cuts
            • For vertical reduction, a segment of bone is removed from the chin.
            • In asymmetric chins a wedge may be removed from one or other side in
              order to gain symmetry (in some cases, the wedge removed from one
              side is reversed and used to augment the contralateral side).
            • Vertical augmentation procedures require grafting with bone or a
              suitable alloplastic material.
            • The standard sliding genioplasty employs a horizontal cut, made about
              5mm below the level of the mental foramen to avoid inadvertent injury
              to the nerve, which often loops below the foramen prior to exiting the
              bony canal. The cut should be carried as far posteriorly on the lower
              border as possible to ensure a smooth lower border contour.
            • Once complete, the lower border of the chin should be freely mobile
              without any bony interferences.
            • Care should be taken to ensure adequate haemostasis of any vessels,
              particularly on the lingual aspect, which could be damaged by the saw.
            •	Attachments of the geniohyoid and genioglossus muscles should be
              maintained to preserve the blood supply to the chin segment.
                                                             Genioplasty         265


Fixation
(See Fig. 5.24.)
• Fixation with miniplates or screws.
• Plates may be used to fix the segment. Chin plates are now available
   that are pre-​bent to achieve the desired predetermined advance.
• Lag or bicortical screws offer a secure means of fixation with little in the
   way of palpable fixation, but generally require greater stripping of the
   lower border anteriorly to permit the required angulation.
Soft tissue closure
•	Accurate closure in two layers is essential.
•	A genioplasty pressure dressing is applied to support the soft tissues for
  the first 24–​48h.




Fig. 5.24 Various methods of fixation in genioplasty.
Reproduced with permission of Professor K. F. Moos.
26



     266    Chapter 5     Orthognathic surgery


           Complications
           Haemorrhage
           Risk reduced by
           • LA with adrenaline.
           •	Use of cutting diathermy.
           •	Hypotensive anaesthesia.
           •	Efficient operating resulting in shorter surgical time.
           •	Use of antifibrinolytics.
           • Care at pterygomaxillary dysjunction—​correct positioning, small
              osteotome.
           • Some advocate a posterior transmaxillary osteotomy through the
              tuberosity.
           Sources
           • Pterygoid venous plexus.
           • Greater palatine pedicle.
           •	Nasopalatine vessels.
           • Maxillary artery.
           Management
           • Diathermy/​ligation of local vessels.
           • Packing.
           •	Haemostatic gauze.
           • Fixation of mobile fragments.
           • Ligation of external carotid artery (rarely indicated and often
             ineffective).
           •	Angiography and embolization.
           Unfavourable osteotomy
           Unwanted fractures or osteotomy patterns may arise during any procedure,
           but are by far most commonly encountered in the sagittal split osteotomy
           of the mandible. The incidence of ‘bad’ split varies, but is as high as 23% in
           some series. Predisposing factors include:
           • Thin ascending ramus with no cancellous bone.
           •	Unfavourable bone texture.
           • Wisdom teeth in the line of the osteotomy.
           • Failure to divide the lower border at the buccal cut.
           The most serious form of unfavourable split occurs when the condyle re-
           mains on the distal segment—​this can be identified by an inability to reduce
           the height of the ramus. Should this occur, it is essential to complete the
           split and separate the condyle from the distal fragment. This may require
           a low subcondylar osteotomy. If at all possible the condyle should be fixed
           as per a condylar fracture and the osteotomy completed, although in most
           cases this complication will require the use of postoperative IMF.
              Undesirable fractures are not common in maxillary osteotomies, al-
           though pterygomaxillary disjunction may result in unfavourable fractures
           propagating up towards the base of the skull. If pterygoid disjunction is
           incomplete then difficulty in advancing the maxilla may be encountered.
                                                            Complications          267


Nerve damage
Mandible
• Inferior alveolar nerve is at particular risk during sagittal splitting of the
  mandible.
• Immediately postoperatively paraesthesia is almost universal, although
  the majority of patients go on to recover sensation.
• The rate of long-​term paraesthesia varies in the literature from 3% to
  25%, although sporadic reports of up to 85% are published.
•	Age is a risk factor for nerve damage with those patients >40 years
  being at significantly greater risk of some form of permanently altered
  sensation.
• Lag screws increase the incidence of nerve damage.
• Bicortical screws avoid nerve damage, although care is required in their
  placement.
• Intraoral VSS has much lower risk of damage to the inferior alveolar
  nerve than BSS—​long-​term paraesthesia is rare.
• Simultaneous BSSO and genioplasty carries an i risk of sensory
  disturbance compared with BSSO alone.
• Facial nerve damage during mandibular ramus osteotomies is rarely
  reported (0.5–​%)—​most cases resolve spontaneously.
Maxilla
•	A number of nerves may be damaged during maxillary osteotomy,
  although long-​term sensory loss is most unusual.
• The exception to this is the sensation of the labial gingival and the
  anterior palatal mucosa—​long-​term sensory disturbance at these sites is
  not infrequently seen.
• Cranial nerves II, III, IV, VI, X, and XII are all reported to have been
  damaged during maxillary surgery, presumably by unfavourable fracture
  patterns propagating up to the base of the skull.
Condylar positioning
The position of the condyle within the fossa differs between the awake,
upright patient and the supine patient on the operating table. This pos-
itional change is exaggerated by muscle relaxation or paralysis induced by
anaesthesia.
• In BSSO, if the condyles are incorrectly positioned then a malocclusion
   will result.
• Condylar positioning devices have been described, which preserve
   the relation between the condyle and fossa, but have never gained
   widespread acceptance and are rarely used.
• Significant mandibular rotation causes:
   • rotation of the condyle;
   • winging out of the proximal fragment;
   • inability to get the two fragments to lie passively (some degree of
     this may have to be accepted to prevent excessive torquing of the
     condyle).
During Le Fort I maxillary osteotomy (especially impaction), if excessive
force has to be applied to position the maxilla, the maxilla can rotate around
268



      268    Chapter 5     Orthognathic surgery

            any bony interference. This causes the condyles to be distracted out of the
            glenoid fossae. If the maxilla is fixed in this position, an anterior open bite
            will be present on release of the temporary IMF. To avoid this complication
            it is essential that the maxilla can be positioned passively, and that any up-
            ward pressure is applied at the mandibular angles and not at the chin.
            Tooth damage
            •	Not common in orthognathic surgery.
            • Due to direct surgical damage or loss of vitality as a result of ischaemic
              change.
            • Surgical damage to teeth is most likely to occur during segmental
              surgery.
            • Le Fort I cut that is placed too low may damage apices.
            • Fixation screws may perforate roots if inappropriately placed.
            Genioplasty complications
            •	Nerve damage resulting in loss of sensation in the distribution of the
              mental nerve.
            • Damage to the roots of the anterior teeth either by the bone cut or by
              fixation screws.
            • Postoperative infection may necessitate the removal of plates and
              screws.
            • Mal-​ or non-​union.
            •	Excessive stripping of the segment may result in avascular necrosis.
            • Scarring can result in tethering of the lower lip and reduction in the
              depth of the labial sulcus.
            • Inadequate repair of the mentalis muscle will result in ptosis of the
              lower lip with i lower incisor show and deepening of the labiomental
              groove.
Complications   269
270



      270    Chapter 5       Orthognathic surgery


            Soft tissue changes
            Nasal changes
            After Le Fort I osteotomy:
            • The alar base widens.
            • The nasal tip is upturned.
            • The nasolabial angle decreases with maxillary advance.
            •	A combination of maxillary impaction and advancement has the greatest
              effect on nasal aesthetics.
            Reduction of nasal septum
            In maxillary impaction, it is essential to reduce the nasal septum by an
            amount equivalent to the impaction, in order to prevent buckling of the
            septum with consequent nasal deviation and airway obstruction.
            Cinch sutures/​hollowing of nasal rim
            Various techniques are described to try to prevent or minimize adverse
            effects (Fig. 5.25). The cinch suture engages fibrocartilaginous tissue at the
            alar base on either side and is tied in the midline to achieve the desired
            width (Fig. 5.26). This suture:
            • Controls the transverse dimension of the alar base.
            • Improves tip projection.
            • Decreases shortening of the upper lip.
            • Maintains the thickness of the upper lip.
            • May only be effective in the short term.
            An alternative approach is to remove bone from around the piriform
            aperture.
            V–​Y closure
            V–​Y closure of the anterior sulcus incision may help minimize lip shortening
            and maintain lip thickness. A set amount of vertical closure is carried out
            prior to closing the remainder of the horizontal incision (Fig. 5.27).

                           (a)


                                                        (b)




            Fig. 5.25 (a, b) Adverse aesthetic result in the nose following maxillary advance and
            impaction at the Le Fort I level. Note the flaring of the nostrils, widening of the alar
            base, and upturned nasal tip.
                                                          Soft tissue changes                 271




Fig. 5.26 Alar ‘cinch’ suture. A non-​resorbable suture is used and picks up the fibro-​
fatty tissue at the alar base on either side of the nose. It is tied to adjust the width of
the alar base.




                                                           V–Y closure




Fig. 5.27 V–​Y closure of the anterior sulcus incision.
27



     272       Chapter 5   Orthognathic surgery


           Stability
           • The maintenance of the achieved postoperative result in the long term.
           • Postsurgical change may be classified as relapse or migration.
           • Relapse is movement towards the preoperative position, whereas
             migration is continued movement in the direction of the initial move.
           • Relapse may be skeletal or dental in origin.
           • Careful planning of presurgical orthodontics aims to build in relapse.
           •	A hierarchy of stability has been described by W.R. Proffit, T.A. Turvey,
             and C. Phillips from longitudinal data collected over many years at the
             University of North Carolina, USA.
           Most stable to least stable
           •   Maxillary impaction.
           •   Mandibular advance.
           •   Maxillary advancement.
           •   Maxillary impaction with mandibular advancement.
           •   Maxillary advancement with mandibular set-​back.
           •   Mandibular set-​back.
           •   Increase in maxillary width.
           •   Inferior positioning of the maxilla.
           Maxillary surgery
           • Impaction is the most stable of all the maxillary movements, but stability
             is decreasing if combined with advancement.
           • Rigid fixation with plates offers improved stability over wire osteosynthesis.
           • Larger moves exhibit greater postoperative change and moves of
             >8mm should be considered potentially unstable.
           •	A period of IMF may aid stability.
           • Grafting of an advancement with blocks placed between the pterygoid
             plates and the posterior maxilla does not appear to increase stability.
           • Inferior positioning is the least stable movement and relapse rates of
             around 30–​50% are reported.
           • Inferior repositioning of the maxilla can be accompanied by grafting to
             enhance stability and a good bony union.
           • Mal-​or non-​union of the maxilla is most commonly seen after inferior
             repositioning.
           Transverse dimension
           • In younger patients with a small transverse discrepancy orthodontic
             means via rapid palatal expansion can achieve stable results (before the
             age of 4).
           • Older patients or those requiring a greater degree of expansion. The
             most stable results are achieved with SARPE.
           • Surgical widening of the maxilla is generally considered to be an unstable
             move, but a number of techniques can be utilized to minimize relapse:
             • horseshoe osteotomy of the palate, rather than a simple midline split;
             • expansion should be supported for at least 6 weeks postoperatively,
                either by a colleted acrylic plate worn in the palate, or by an
                accessory archwire on the bucco-​labial side;
             • consider bone grafting of the expansion gap in the palate to aid stability.
                                                                Stability       273


Cleft patients
• Present particular challenges.
• Maxilla may be grossly hypoplastic both horizontally and in a vertical
  dimension, requiring therefore advancement and down-​grafting.
• Move may be significant and optimum aesthetics often require that
  ideally this move is achieved in the maxilla and not by combining a
  mandibular set-​back.
• Scarring may make advancement of the maxilla very difficult and it may
  not be possible to achieve the desired position.
• Scarring may cause early relapse in the first few weeks postoperatively.
• Incidence of mal-​union is higher in this group of patients than non-​cleft
  patients.
• IMF may improve stability and the use of a ‘Delaire’ mask in early
  postoperative period may help to reduce relapse.
• Distraction osteogenesis has been used widely in cleft patients
  to achieve maxillary advancements that could not be achieved by
  conventional orthognathic surgery.
• It was hoped that the results obtained by distraction osteogenesis would
  be stable, but relapse still occurs.
Mandibular surgery
BSSO advancement
• Stability depends on the degree of advancement and method of
  fixation.
• Wire osteosynthesis is inferior to semi-​rigid fixation with either
  bicortical screws or monocortical screws and miniplates in terms of
  stability.
• Little evidence whether screws or plates offer greater stability.
• Compression or lag screws confer no increase in stability.
• Three screws placed in a triangular or inverted-​L pattern offer greater
  stability than three screws placed in a linear fashion along the upper
  border.
• To correct an anterior open bite, the use of four screws has been
  recommended.
• Larger advancements show greater degrees of relapse irrespective of
  the method of fixation—​for advances in excess of 0mm. The addition
  of supplemental skeletal fixation with suspension wires for  week
  postoperatively has been shown to improve stability.
Mandibular set-​back
• Different degrees of stability between a BSSO and intraoral VSS. Sagittal
  split tends to relapse forwards, whereas the VSS tends to migrate
  further posteriorly.
• Large movements are more unstable and are attributed to impingement
  of the posterior border against the pterygomasseteric sling.
• The Hunsuck modification of the sagittal split mitigates against this
  problem by having a much shorter lingual segment.
274



      274    Chapter 5     Orthognathic surgery

            Condylar resorption
            • Presentation is generally between 6 and 8 months post surgery.
            • Incidence reported between 2% and 8%.
            •	Horizontal relapse often occurs, with development of an anterior open
              bite due to clockwise rotation of the mandible.
            • Radiography reveals:
              • flattening of the condylar head;
              • posterior angulation and shortening of the condylar neck.

            Risk factors
            • ♀ patients.
            • Class II malocclusions.
            •	High Frankfort mandibular plane angle.
            • Pre-​existing TMJ symptoms.
            • Large mandibular advances (>0mm).
            • Counter clockwise rotation of the mandible to close an anterior
               open bite.
            Aetiology: theories
            • i pressure on the posterior surface of the condylar head (especially in
              large advances) increases the load on the joint and stimulates a process
              of resorption possible by adverse effects on blood flow.
            •	Alteration of the position of the condylar head in the glenoid fossa may
              induce remodelling changes.
            Management
            • Most cases ‘burn out’ after a time and then remain stable.
            • Some postulate a splint that postures the mandible forward and unloads
              the joint may be of benefit.
            • Secondary corrective surgery is controversial. Patients certainly have to
              be made aware that condylar resorption is unpredictable and may occur
              again after further surgery.
            • ?Corrective surgery should be confined to the maxilla in order to avoid
              further insult to the condyles if at all possible.
            • Others argue that further mandibular surgery can be stable.
Stability   275
276



      276    Chapter 5     Orthognathic surgery


            Distraction osteogenesis
            Introduction
            •	A biological process of new bone formation between two bone
              surfaces, which are gradually separated by incremental traction.
            • Traditionally, a corticotomy is used to provide the two bony surfaces,
              although in maxillofacial practice a full osteotomy is often employed.
            •	A latent period allows the formation of early callus between the bone
              ends before entering the distraction phase.
            • During this phase the bones ends are separated by the application of a
              distraction force.
            • Forces are generated away from the bone ends.
            • Once the desired lengthening has been achieved, a period of
              consolidation allows ossification of the callus to be completed.
            • One of the advantages of distraction osteogenesis is the simultaneous
              lengthening of the soft tissues that occurs.
            Biology of distraction
            • Osteogenesis associated with distraction occurs primarily by the
              recruitment of primitive mesenchymal cells (membranous ossification).
            •	Haematoma forms in the gap between the bone ends and there is a
              marked inflammatory reaction.
            • Vascular response occurs along with the appearance of mesenchymal
              cells and the synthesis of type  collagen.
            •	A fibrovascular bridge is formed between the bone ends with collagen
              fibres aligned along the axis of distraction.
            • Bone first appears around day 0–​4.
            • Growth factors and cytokines are involved in the regulation of bone
              formation—​these include bone morphogenetic proteins, insulin-​like
              growth factors, and transforming growth factors.
            Terminology of distraction
            • Corticotomy: division of cortex.
            • Latency period: period of time between the osteotomy and placement
              of the distractor before active separation of the bone ends begins. It
              is recommended that this phase lasts from 3 to 7 days according to the
              clinical situation.
            • Distraction phase (Fig. 5.28):
              • Phase of active distraction when the bone ends are being separated;
              • Rate of distraction should be mm per day with an i rate of
                 .5mm per day in children under the age of 6, to prevent premature
                 consolidation;
              •	Not only is the rate of distraction important, but also the rhythm with
                 0.5mm twice a day being more effective than mm per day;
              • Research suggests that gradual continuous distraction is likely to be
                 most effective and miniaturized motorized distractors are under
                 development.
            • Consolidation phase: period during which maturation and ossification
              of the callus takes place (distraction device remains in situ often ‘locked-​
              off ’ to prevent any change in position).
                                               Distraction osteogenesis           277


             (a) Latency



                                                     Osteotomy




             (b) Activation                          Radiodense
                                                     sclerotic zones
                                                     Fibrous interzone
                                                     Microtubules




             (c) Consolidation

                                                     Blood vessels
                                                     Aligned trabecular
                                                     pattern




Fig. 5.28 Schematic illustrating the phases of distraction osteogenesis. Latent
period, activation or distraction, and finally consolidation.

Indications
Distraction is generally indicated in cases of syndromic deformity:
•	Hemifacial microsomia.
• Treacher Collins syndrome.
• Pierre–​Robin sequence.
• Midface hypoplasia.
•	Apert syndrome.
• Crouzon syndrome.
• Cleft palate.
•	Extremes of conventional orthognathic surgery.
Mandibular distraction
•	Achieved with either intraoral or extraoral devices.
• Intraoral devices are fixed directly to the bone with screws just like
  miniplates:
  • may be completely intraoral, in which case the activation rod usually
     lies in the buccal sulcus;
278



      278    Chapter 5       Orthognathic surgery




            Fig. 5.29 Internal single vector mandibular distractor with external activation.

              • may be a transcutaneous external port (generally just beneath the
                angle of the mandible) (Fig. 5.29);
              • have the advantage of producing no external scarring, but are limited
                in as much as they require a minimum volume of bone to allow
                adequate fixation and are hence unsuitable for very small mandibles;
              • removal of these devices may be very difficult.
            •	Extraoral devices are easier to place, especially on the diminutive
              mandible, and also much easier to remove at the end of treatment.
              • osteotomy may be carried out through either an intraoral or a skin
                incision, with the pins being placed via a trocar;
              • the distraction vector is easier to control than with intraoral devices
                (Fig. 5.30);
              • Main disadvantages are the obvious appearance of the distractor
                and the scarring, which results from the fixation pins being dragged
                through the tissues (can be reduced by pushing the soft tissues
                towards osteotomy site prior to pin insertion).
            Maxillary distraction
            •	Used for midface advancement in craniofacial cases or for cleft patients
              with significant maxillary hypoplasia.
            • Considered to be less detrimental to speech in patients with potential
              velopharyngeal incompetence than conventional maxillary osteotomy.
            • Like mandibular distraction, can be carried out with an extraoral tooth-​
              borne device, such as the rigid external distractor (RED) or with buried
              intraoral devices (Fig. 5.3).
            Complications
            • Damage to unerupted tooth germs or the inferior alveolar nerve by
              fixation pins.
            • Inadequate bone volume may limit the options for device placement
              and, hence, lead to an undesirable distraction vector.
            • Device failure can occur with resulting inability to achieve the desired
              distraction or necessitating replacement of the device.
                                                Distraction osteogenesis             279




                                                                        Transverse

                                                    Linear




                                                    Angular

Fig. 5.30 Extraoral multivector distractor.
© 2008 DePuy Synthes.

                (a)




                (b)




Fig. 5.3 (a) External ‘RED’ maxillary distractor. (b) Internal buried maxillary
distractors in situ at the Le Fort I level.

• Loosening of pins may also lead to failure.
• Condylar pain may be felt during active distraction as the reciprocal
  effect of the lengthening of the mandible is to push the mandibular
  condyle up into the glenoid fossa. This may also cause remodelling of
  the condylar head.
280



      280    Chapter 5      Orthognathic surgery

            Stability
            Initial hopes for distraction osteogenesis were that it would be free of re-
            lapse due to the gradual increase in the length of the tissues over time.
            Although relapse rates may often be better than obtained with conven-
            tional surgery, there is no doubt that relapse may, in some cases, still be
            considerable.
            Adjunctive procedures
            Following successful orthognathic treatment, some patients may be left with
            residual deformity. This is most commonly seen in patients who have pre-
            sented with significant asymmetry. Bowing of the lower border of the man-
            dible in patients with hemi-​mandibular hypertrophy may result in noticeable
            residual asymmetry following orthognathic surgery, even when all the mid-
            line structures have been correctly positioned in the facial midline (Fig. 5.32).
               The treatment options in this scenario are either to reduce the lower
            border on one side, or augment the other in order to achieve symmetry.
            Reduction of the mandible is generally complicated by the inferior alveolar
            nerve, which has to be dissected free and repositioned in order to allow the
            required bony reduction. An alternative approach is to utilize CAD/​CAM
            technology, mirror imaging the other side to custom fabricate an onlay with
            which to augment the deficient side. PEEK (polyethyl-​ether ketone) is a
            high-​density plastic that can be custom fabricated and has good biocompati-
            bility (Fig. 5.33 and Fig. 5.34).




            Fig. 5.32 Shows asymmetry of the lower borders of the mandible in a patient with
            hemi-​mandibular hyperplasia.
                                             Distraction osteogenesis                281


  This technique can be used in a variety of situations to help achieve sym-
metry between two sides or to restore bony deficiencies as a result of con-
genital or post-​traumatic deformity, or post-​resection defects.




Fig. 5.33 3D skeletal model showing the mandibular asymmetry with the proposed
custom-​made onlay fabricated by mirror imaging the left side.




Fig. 5.34 Postoperative result following insertion of custom onlay to lower border
of right side of mandible of patient in Fig. 5.32.
28



     282    Chapter 5     Orthognathic surgery


           Obstructive sleep apnoea
           Definitions
           Obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA) is characterized by repetitive collapse of
           the upper airway during sleep.
             It is defined as repetitive, discrete episodes of d airflow (hypopnea) or
           complete cessation of airflow (apnoea) for at least a 0-​second duration in
           association with a >2% reduction in O2 haemoglobin saturation and that
           may cause an arousal from sleep.
           •	Apnoea—​cessation of airflow lasting >0 seconds.
           •	Hypopnea—​>2/​3 decrease in tidal volume; both show a decrease in O2
             saturation of at least 2%.
           • OSA is above findings on lab/​testing alone.
           • Obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome (OSAS) is OSA + signs and
             symptoms of the disease (Table 5.7).
           These episodes of collapse produce a collection of physiological
           derangements.
           • Sleep fragmentation (for a normal sleep cycle, see Table 5.8).
           •	Hypoxaemia.
           •	Hypercapnia.
           • Marked swing in intrathoracic pressure.
           • Impaired cognition.
           Contributing factors
           • There is increasing evidence that significant OSA is associated with
             metabolic syndrome. This comprises:
             • hypertension and type 2 diabetes;
             • with associated disturbance of lipid metabolism and central obesity
                that predisposes to cardiovascular disease, including MI and stroke.
           • Prevalence is 2–​4% of the population with a slight ♂ preponderance.
           • Snoring is defined as partial airway and pharyngeal flow obstruction
             that does not cause the individual to arouse from sleep. Movement of
             air through the partially obstructed airway creates vibration and thus
             snoring sound.
             • Snoring itself is not pathognomonic of OSAS; 25% of ♂ snore, and
                this increases with age—​60% of 60 year olds. One can snore without
                having OSA, but eventually it can degrade to new onset OSA.

           Table 5.7 Symptoms of OSAS
           Primary symptom                     Excessive daytime sleepiness
           Secondary symptoms                  Loud snoring
                                               Morning headache
                                               Depression
                                               Impotence
                                               Frequent arousal at night
                                               Hypertension
                                             Obstructive sleep apnoea              283


• Laser-​assisted uvulopalatoplasty or Bovie-​assisted uvulopalatoplasty
  are the most common surgical procedures for snoring—​both shorten
  uvula/​soft palate by about cm; it also stiffens and reduces its ability to
  vibrate. Can be done under LA, superficial, less postoperative pain.
Examination of patient presenting with obstructive
sleep apnoea
• Thorough head and neck exam.
• Body habitus.
•	Nose—​septal deviation, polyps, turbinate hypertrophy, allergic rhinitis.
• Oral cavity—​large tonsil, redundant soft palate, uvula, macroglossia,
  retrognathia, submental fat.
•	Neck—​thick short neck.
• Screen for hypothyroidism, cor pulmonale, hypertension.
Objective testing
•	Electroencephalography (EEG), thoracic and abdominal efforts.
•	Electrooculography (EOG).
• Pulse oximetry.
• Chin and leg electromyography.
•	Nasal and oral airflow.
• Multiple sleep latency tests (MSLT).
• Sleep nasoendoscopy.
•	Exacerbating factors:
  •	Alcohol, sedatives, narcotics, weight gain, upper respiratory tract
     infection, allergies.

Table 5.8 The five stages of a normal sleep cycle
 REM and 4 NREM; stage III, IV and REM most relaxed hence OSA most likely
to occur
Stage Features                    Waves
      Awake                       Beta
      Drowsy, relaxed             Alpha
I     Intermediate between        Theta             Transitional stage,
      consciousness and sleep;                      drowsiness—​lasts 5–​5 min
II    Heart rate slows, brain     Sleep spindles  More stable sleep—​
      does less complicated tasks and K complexes chemicals which block
                                                  awakening stimuli
III   Body makes repairs—​        Delta             Growth hormone released
      deep sleep
IV    Body temperature         Delta                Sleep walking, night terrors
      and blood pressure                            may occur, enuresis
      decreases—​deepest sleep
V     Blood pressure, heart                         Revitalization, memory
      rate, temperature
      increase, increase in eye
      movements
284



      284    Chapter 5    Orthognathic surgery

            Symptoms
            •	Nocturnal: loud snoring, witnessed breathing interruptions, awakenings
              due to gasping or choking, nocturia.
            • Diurnal: waking up unrefreshed, morning headache, daytime
              sleepiness—​should be quantified using the Epworth Sleepiness Scale
              (ESS; score 0–​24 and normal is 0–​8).


             Epworth Sleepiness Scale
             The ESS is a screening questionnaire with eight questions each scored
             0–​3 on likeliness of falling asleep.
               Add the individual scores to calculate the total ‘chance of dozing’.
             • The ESS score can vary from 0 to 24.
             •	ESS values range from 0 (unlikely to fall asleep in any situation) to 24
               (high chance of falling sleep in all eight situations).
             The ESS final score of:
             • 0–​0 is considered normal.
             • –​4 is considered as mild daytime sleepiness.
             • 5–​8 is considered as moderate daytime sleepiness.
             • 9–​24 is considered as severe daytime sleepiness.
               Other sleep questionnaires used include Karolinska, Berlin, and
               Pittsburgh sleep questionnaires. More recently the STOP Bang question-
               naire is being used, particularly in primary care.



            Diagnosis
            Criteria for diagnosis:
            • Five or more obstructive events per hour of sleep and presence of
              symptoms.
            • 5 or more obstructive events per hour of sleep irrespective of
              symptoms.
            Polysomnography or sleep testing
            Obstructive events
            •	Apnoea—​breathing interruption >0 seconds.
            •	Hypopnea—​>50% decrease in nasal airflow or >2/​3 decrease in tidal
              volume with 3% decrease in O2 saturation.
            • Respiratory effort-​related arousals (RERAs)—​<50% decrease in nasal
              pressure and i work of breathing associated with arousal.
            Indexes that report the obstructive events
            •	Apnoea–​Hypopnoea Index (AHI) represents the number of obstructive
              respiratory events per hour of sleep.
            •	AHI + pulse oximetry are the primary indicators of OSA.
            • RERAs—​arousals associated with breathing that do not meet the
              technical criteria for apnoea or hypopnea.
            •	AHI = apnoea + hypopneas/​total sleep time × 60.
            • Respiratory depression index (RDI) = AHI + RERA.
                                             Obstructive sleep apnoea               285


Indexes that report severity of hypoxia
• Oxygen saturation nadir.
• Total time of hypoxia.
These indices can be used to measure the severity of OSA (Table 5.9).
Cephalometry
• Recommended when surgery is being considered.
•	Evaluation minimum three measurements.
• Soft palate length—​distance from postnasal spine to uvula tip mean 35mm.
• Posterior airway space—​smallest AP distance between base of tongue
  and post pharyngeal wall mean mm.
•	Hyoid to mandibular plane distance—​ideal <5mm.
• From anterosuperior limit of the hyoid to the mandibular plane.
• This distance is proportional to height of the pharynx.
Sleep endoscopy
•	Not yet a standard test; done in the operating room with full
   anaesthesia support.
• Patients lay prone and receive propofol to induce sleep. Nasoendoscopy
   is performed while patient is sleeping.
• Patients stratified into phase I or phase II treatments.
• Patients with limited airway obstruction—​will do well after phase
   I surgery.
• Patients with complete collapse—​better skipping phase I and moving to
   advancement of maxillomandibular complex.
Modified Müller’s technique
• During fibreoptic nasopharyngoscopy, patient performs an inspiratory
  effort against a closed mouth with the scope tip first above the soft
  palate and second with the tip just above the tongue base.
•	Examiner observes the degree of closure at each level.
Fujita classification
• Classification of anatomical site of obstruction in the upper airway
  (Table 5.0).
Classification of obstructive sleep apnoea
Obstructive, central, and mixed
• OSA—​normal inspiratory effort but obstructed airway causing
  intermittent cessation of airflow.
• Central sleep apnoea—​marked lack of inspiratory effort, secondary to
  failure of respiratory centre—​treatment by neurologists and sleep specialists.

 Table 5.9 Severity of OSA
                      RDI                O2 sats (%)         AHI
 Mild OSA             0–​30             >90                 5–​5
 Moderate OSA         30–​50             60 <85              5–​30
 Severe OSA           >50                <60                 >30
286



      286    Chapter 5        Orthognathic surgery

            • OSA high prevalence in COPD patients (moderate to severe COPD).
            • Systemic complications associated with OSA:
              • cor pulmonale.
              • hypertension.
              • daytime somnolence.
              • hypoxia, death.
              • polycythemia.
              • depression.
              • stroke.

            Treatment
            Cure is measured as:
            • Postoperative AHI reduction of at least 50% with a maximum of 20.
              Although now most believe true cure is only when it is reduced to 0.
            • Postoperative O2 saturation that is normal or briefly falls below 90%.
            •	Normalization of sleep architecture.
            Medical and surgical
            Medical
            • Behaviour modification—​positional therapy, avoid supine position.
            • Weight loss.
            •	Exercise.
            •	Avoid alcohol and sedatives.
            • Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP)—​most effective
              non-​surgical therapy; 00% effective but poorly tolerated (patient
              discomfort), 50% stop using it.
            • Complications from CPAP include:
              • mask leak—​conjunctivitis, skin rash;
              • pressure/​flow related—​rhinorrhoea, nasal dryness, chest/​sinus
                 discomfort, tympanic membrane rupture, massive epistaxis,
                 pneumothorax.

            Table 5.0 The Fujita classification in patients with OSA
            Type       Site                                  Anatomical entities
            I          Retropalatal and normal tongue        Soft palate, uvula, tonsil, pillars
            II         Retropalatal + tongue                 Above + tongue base
            III        Retrolingual, supraglottic,           Retrognathia, floppy epiglottis,
                       hypopharyngeal obstruction, and       lingual tonsil
                       normal palate
            Type I—​narrow oropharynx (retropalatal), large tonsil, uvula, and pillar webbing
            Type II—​oral and hypopharyngeal obstruction (retropalatal and retrolingual),
            low-​arched palate and large tongue
            Type III—​hypopharyngeal obstruction (retrolingual only) retrognathia, floppy
            epiglottis, enlarged lingual tonsils
            Most OSA patients have a combined problem:
            20% discrete type II OSA
            0% discrete type I
                                           Obstructive sleep apnoea              287


• Mandibular positioning device:
  • better outcomes in patients with smaller BMI;
  • better outcome in mild to moderate OSA;
  • better tolerated than CPAP;
  • but disadvantages can produce jaw pain and malocclusion;
  • success rate for all users is about 47%.

Surgical
• For OSAS caused by morbid obesity refractory to weight management,
  consider bariatric surgery.
• Maxillomandibular advancement surgery or mandibular advancement
  surgery can be used in selected cases.
Planning considerations in sleep apnoea
There are a number of decisions to be made specifically in relation to those
patients with sleep apnoea.
    It is generally considered that to correct sleep apnoea it is necessary
to advance the mandible by cm, although literature to support this par-
ticular figure is lacking.
• Sleep apnoea patients generally present at an older age than most
   orthognathic patients. They may or may not have any pre-​existing
   malocclusion (indeed, they can have perfect Class I occlusions) and
   often have no aesthetic concerns. There may be pressure to offer
   treatment as quickly as possible. Some of these patients may have
   limitations placed on their employment as a result of their sleep apnoea.
   This desire for expeditious treatment is at odds with a prolonged period
   of presurgical orthodontics. It is often wise in these patients to have
   had a trial of treatment with a mandibular advancement splint. If this
   is effective in managing their symptoms then it offers reassurance that
   surgical advance will be equally effective.
• These patients must be assessed in the same as any other orthognathic
   patient. If per chance they are significantly retrognathic, then mandibular
   advance may offer both resolution of their sleep apnoea as well as
   aesthetic improvement.
• The fundamental decision in treatment planning is whether to go
   down a conventional orthognathic route with presurgical orthodontic
   preparation, or simply to offer bimaxillary advance while maintaining
   the existing occlusion. If orthodontic preparation is undertaken, the
   aim is to achieve an overjet that will allow either a cm advance of
   the mandible or an overjet, which if combined with a small maxillary
   advance, would facilitate the same. If patients are willing to combine
   orthodontics and surgery, it is likely they may have a better aesthetic
   outcome. Accepting the existing occlusion and advancing both jaws
   may involve a compromise on the final facial aesthetics although this is
   often acceptable to this group of patients, particularly in view of the
   accelerated treatment (Fig. 5.35).
• Patients who have bimaxillary advance with the aim of maintaining
   their existing occlusion often adapt more slowly, perhaps because even
   the very smallest change in the occlusion is perceived to be different,
   whereas if the occlusion is expected to change then adaptation appears
   quicker.
28



     288    Chapter 5           Orthognathic surgery

                             (a)




                             (b)




           Fig. 5.35 (a) Pre-​and (b) postoperative lateral cephalogram showing the change in
           the dimensions of the airway in a patient who has undergone bimaxillary surgery for
           sleep apnoea.

           Further reading
           Ayoub, A., Khambay, B., Benington, P., et al. (203). Handbook of Orthognathic Treatment: A Team
             Approach. Wiley-​Blackwell, Oxford.
           Naini, F.B., Daljit, S. Gill, D.S. (eds). (207). Orthognathic Surgery: Principles, Planning and Practice.
             Wiley Blackwell, Oxford.
 Chapter 6                                            289



Craniofacial surgery
Introduction 290
Classification 290
Craniosynostosis 291
Single-​suture synostosis 292
Syndromic synostosis 294
Torticollis and positional skull deformity 298
Craniofacial procedures 300
Craniofacial clefting disorders 304
Craniofacial tumours 306
Vascular malformations of the head and neck 308
Hemifacial microsomia 310
Treacher Collins syndrome 312
The craniofacial team 313
Organization of craniofacial services in the UK 314
290



      290    Chapter 6      Craniofacial surgery


            Introduction
            Craniofacial surgery is the subspecialist area of surgery that diagnoses and
            manages a large heterogeneous group of both congenital and acquired
            conditions. The common factor is the involvement of the cranium (and its
            contents) and the face. Craniofacial surgeons are usually either oral and
            maxillofacial or plastic surgeons working with neurosurgeons. Because
            of the complexity and range of conditions managed, the overall care
            is provided by an extensive MDT (see % The craniofacial team, p. 313).
            Craniofacial units usually provide care to both paediatric and adult patients.


            Classification
            Numerous classifications exist with little agreement as to which offers the
            best approach. Each has advantages and disadvantages (see % Further
            reading, p. 314 for more information).
              For the purposes of simplicity, the following classification will be utilized:
            • Craniosynostosis: group of conditions characterized by the premature
              closure of the skull vault sutures.
            • Craniofacial clefting disorders: characterized by a failure of the
              developing branchial arches (or other structures) to fuse or possibly the
              breakdown of previously fused structures.
            • Craniofacial tumours: only specific to craniofacial surgery because of
              their location and the necessity to utilize craniofacial techniques for their
              surgical management.
            • Head and neck vascular anomalies.
                                                       Craniosynostosis             291


Craniosynostosis
Craniosynostosis is the premature fusion of one or more of the skull vault
sutures. Termed ‘simple’ synostosis if a single suture is involved and ‘com-
plex’ if multiple sutures are involved. It must be noted that this classification
does not indicate the how complex the management of the condition is.
Most complex cases are syndromic, whereas most single-​suture synostoses
are not. However, there are rare single-​suture synostoses associated with
syndromes, e.g. unilateral coronal synostosis associated with FGFR3 gene
mutations (Muenke syndrome).
•	Premature fusion of a suture can result in:
   • restricted growth at right angles to the affected suture;
   • degree of compensatory overgrowth (or bossing) in other areas of
      the skull vault;
   • raised ICP.
• In multiple suture or syndromic craniosynostoses, head shape is
   determined by the number and site of the involved sutures. Can result
   in severe restriction of skull vault growth along with:
   • raised ICP;
   • exophthalmos;
   • optic dislocation (globes herniate anterior to eyelids);
   • restricted mid-​face growth (upper airway and feeding difficulties).

The severity of functional problems varies from case to case, as does age
of onset. Thus babies born with such conditions need early referral and
close monitoring, so that intervention is timely to minimize long-​term ef-
fects. With the syndromic craniosynostoses, other related abnormalities
(e.g. cardiac, skeletal, renal) will vary from syndrome to syndrome.
   Craniosynostosis can also be the by-​product of a variety of other condi-
tions, so-​called secondary synostosis. There is a higher incidence of raised
ICP in this group, which therefore requires close monitoring.
   Infants with clinical features of raised ICP should be immediately investi-
gated (CT and/​or MRI) and may need urgent surgical intervention. These
features can include:
• Irritability, difficulty settling, and poor sleeping.
•	Poor feeding.
• Drowsiness.
• Developmental delay.
• Bulging fontanelle.
• Distended scalp veins.
•	Papilloedema.
• d consciousness.
•	Apnoea and bradycardia.
29



     292    Chapter 6      Craniofacial surgery


           Single-​suture synostosis
           Presentation
           •	Appears soon after birth or in early infancy, after the effects of birth
             canal moulding should have resolved.
           • Most obvious feature is an abnormally shaped head, which is
             determined by the affected suture (Table 6.1).
           Signs
           •	Examine for raised ICP:
             • palpate fontanelles;
             • fundoscopy.
           •	Affected suture often ridged.
           Investigations
           Plain radiology
           • Not particularly helpful since images are commonly poor quality and
              difficult to interpret.
           • In the case of a unilateral coronal synostosis, the shape of the orbit
              (‘harlequin eye’) may be helpful.
           CT, MRI, or USS
           • Of more use. CT is better at assessing skull anatomy and more diagnostic.
           • In some units, CT is reserved for complex cases and for those who
             decline surgery.
           Management
           •	Refer all patients to a craniofacial team for comprehensive care (allows
             full diagnostic assessment and formulation of management plan).
           • Indications for treatment:
             • to improve appearance;
             • small percentage of patients have associated raised ICP.
           • Some evidence that surgical treatment results in better intellectual
             outcomes (but not universally accepted).
           • Intervention involves:
             • removal of affected suture (‘suturectomy’);
             • remodelling of skull shape.


            Table 6. Suture and resulting head shape
            Suture      Approximate frequency Descriptive term    Resultant head shape
            Sagittal    1 in 4200                Scaphocephaly    Long and narrow
            Metopic     1 in 7500                Trigonocephaly   Pointed forehead
            Unicoronal 1 in 10,000               Plagiocephaly    Asymmetrically
                                                                  flattened forehead
            Bicoronal   Rare                     Brachycephaly    Bilaterally flattened
                                                                  forehead
            Lambdoid    Very rare                Posterior        Posterior asymmetric
                                                 plagiocephaly    flattening
                                          Single-suture synostosis           293


•	Exact procedure and degree of remodelling will vary from case to case
  and craniofacial unit to unit.
• Cases involving the forehead: the key procedure is a fronto-​orbital
  advancement:
  • recontoured skull components are plated into position with
     resorbable fixation;
  • in selected cases, distraction osteogenesis is used.
• In general, surgery at about the age of 1 year in uncomplicated cases is
  the norm.
• For sagittal synostosis, surgery can be performed at 6 months (some
  centres advocate earlier surgery).
• For straightforward single-​suture cases, follow-​up after surgery is
  usually when the child starts school with the anticipation of no further
  intervention being necessary.
• In unilateral coronal synostosis there may be residual facial asymmetry
  that should be managed conventionally as for other facial asymmetries.
  Longer-​term follow-​up may be indicated.
294



      294    Chapter 6     Craniofacial surgery


            Syndromic synostosis
            There are numerous syndromes associated with synostosis. The most
            common are discussed, although management principles are the same for all.
            Crouzon syndrome
            •	Autosomal dominant condition associated with a FGFR2 gene mutation.
            • Commonly presents with a bicoronal synostosis, but other sutures may
              also be involved.
            •	Extent of mid-​face hypoplasia and degree of exorbitism variable.
            • Incidence of raised ICP much higher than non-​syndromic bicoronal synostosis.
            •	Presenting problems vary as does the time of presentation, but
              commonly the diagnosis is suspected at birth or soon after.
            • There are often subtle skeletal abnormalities affecting the limbs, but
              these are rarely obvious or symptomatic.
            Apert syndrome
            •	Also an autosomal dominant condition caused by a mutation of the
              FGFR2 gene.
            • Craniosynostosis often affects the bicoronal as well as other sutures,
              resulting in a tall skull, flattened anteriorly and occipitally.
            • Variable hypertelorism with downward slanting of palpebral fissures.
            • Variable exorbitisim.
            • Shallow orbits and shortened skull base.
            • Most obvious extracranial feature is a variable degree of hand and foot
              abnormalities with complex syndactyly. It is this feature that usually
              makes clinical diagnosis straightforward.
            •	As the child develops, the face takes on the shape of an inverted triangle:
              • hyperteloric eyes form the wide base;
              • hypoplastic maxilla often with crossed central incisors form the apex.
            • Cleft palate is a common (17–​43%) association and in those without a
              cleft the palate is narrow and high-​arched.
            • Intellectual impairment is more common than in Crouzon syndrome.
            Saethre–​Chotzen syndrome
            Presentation much more variable.
            •	Autosomal dominant condition caused by TWIST1 gene mutations.
            • Late presentation (adulthood) common.
            •	Asymmetric, complex bicoronal synostosis that may be mild (accounting
              for late presentations).
            •	Ptosis.
            • Tear duct abnormalities.
            • Low hairline.
            •	Parrot-​beaked nasal shape.
            Pfeiffer syndrome
            •	Autosomal dominant.
            • Variable presentation of complex synostosis, the most severe being the
              clover-​leaf skull (Kleeblattschädel) deformity.
            • The digits (particularly thumbs and big toes) are broad and short.
                                                 Syndromic synostosis              295


Principles of management
Diagnosis
•	Prenatal diagnosis becoming more commonplace.
• Diagnosis in early postnatal period still the norm.
• Clinical assessment confirmed with genetic testing.
Initial management
•	Aimed at assessing and minimizing effects of the condition on vital functions:
   • breathing;
   • eating;
   • scleral cover;
   • presence of raised ICP.
• In some cases urgent tracheostomy and eyelid surgery is necessary.
• Consider feeding via a NGT.
• High incidence of hydrocephalus (~40% of syndromic synostosis),
   consider MRI brain and if necessary ICP monitoring:
   • incidence of up to 70% for Crouzon and Pfeiffer syndromes, and up
      to 90% for Apert syndrome.
• Systematic approach to investigate for additional abnormalities.
• Significant amount of time needs to be devoted to counselling parents
   and other family members about the condition and its implications.
Early management
• In general, approach to the cranial abnormalities similar to
  single-​suture cases.
• Surgery aimed at increasing cranial vault volume and improving the
  overall shape, thus dealing with the potential raised ICP and aesthetic
  concerns.
• Number of different designs of procedure for each type of abnormality
  and different units utilize different approaches.
• Surgical principle—​re-​assembled skull bones held in position with
  resorbable fixation.
• In some units there is a move away from initial fronto-​orbital
  advancement. Instead, a posterior skull vault expansion is carried out,
  delaying any further aesthetic procedures to the anterior of the skull
  until the craniofacial complex is further developed.
• For some cases, particularly those with significant symptomatic
  exorbitism, a monoblock procedure can be carried out:
  • fronto-​orbital bar left attached to the mid-​face;
  • whole unit is advanced, bringing the maxilla, orbital rims, and forehead
     forward.
• Distraction osteogenesis has been used as an alternative to conventional
  osteotomies and plate fixation.
• In terms of timing the initial cranial vault expansion, a balance between a
  number of factors needs to be reached:
  • if the infant is developing signs of raised ICP, then surgery should not
     be delayed;
  • in elective cases, the general state of development, co-​morbidity, and
     size should be taken into account;
  • in most craniofacial units surgery is proposed from 6–​15 months of
     age with the tendency for earlier surgery for sagittal synostosis.
296



      296    Chapter 6     Craniofacial surgery

            Infancy to adolescence
            Monitoring for re-​synostosis.
            Treatment of associated problems
            •	Proactive management of vision and hearing.
            •	Genetic assessment and counselling of parents should they be
              considering having more children.
            • Consideration of further mid-​face surgery and/​or hypertelorism
              correction.
            • Orthodontic input.
            • Management of obstructive sleep apnoea. This can occur as a result
              of mid-​face retrusion and, therefore, mid-​face advancement may be
              helpful. Investigation with formal sleep studies and appropriate imaging
              will help identify and quantify the problem, as well as aid in localizing the
              level of airway obstruction.
            Adolescence to the completion of growth
            •	Emphasis should be on final aspects of surgery to mid-​face and skull.
            •	Regular monitoring for the functional manifestations of raised ICP
              (clinical features as well as papilloedema and formal optic field
              assessment).
            • Developmental and psychological issues.
            •	Patients should be assessed and managed as for other facial
              abnormalities:
              • conventional orthognathic surgery;
              • distraction osteogenesis;
              • other aesthetic surgery techniques, e.g. rhinoplasty, forehead
                 recontouring.
Syndromic synostosis   297
298



      298    Chapter 6      Craniofacial surgery


            Torticollis and positional skull deformity
            Both of these conditions deserve mention because they are often mistaken
            for craniosynostosis, particularly a unilateral coronal synostosis. In addition,
            the management of deformational skull deformity is controversial with a
            variety of experts utilizing helmet moulding to improve the head shape.
            Torticollis
            • Damage to the sternocleidomastoid muscle (either intrauterine or as a
              result of birth trauma) results in shortening.
            • Occasionally a mass forms in the muscle—​‘sternomastoid tumour’.
            • Diagnosis is clinical:
              • baby’s head tilted to the affected side;
              • restriction of head rotation to the contralateral side.
            • USS can be helpful.
            • The asymmetric pull can cause a skull base torsion and plagiocephaly.
            • Treatment initially with active physiotherapy, although a small number (up
              to 10%) benefit from a surgical release of the tight sternomastoid muscle.
            Positional skull deformity
            • Thought to be the result of intrauterine and birth canal moulding
              compounded by the adoption of a preferred head side while the baby is
              lying supine.
            • The ‘back to sleep’ campaign encouraging parents to let babies sleep
              supine to reduce the incidence of sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS)
              has resulted in an i incidence of positional/​deformational plagiocephaly.
            • Typically results in posterior (occipital) skull flattening with one side
              being more affected than the other and ipsilateral frontal bossing giving a
              parallelogram-​shaped head.
            • No evidence that the condition predisposes to facial or TMJ disorders.
            •  Management is controversial:
              • most craniofacial surgeons believe that the condition is largely self-​
                 correcting and tends to improve as the child gains head control, with
                 any resultant deformity being posterior and not likely to be obvious.
                 Therefore, management is expectant with head positioning away from
                 the favoured side and ‘tummy time’;
              • other experts treat more actively with helmet moulding therapy.
                 These devices are worn for a significant proportion of the day over
                 several months and are most effective if treatment is started between
                 the ages of 6 and 12 months; to date, only one RCT assessing the
                 efficacy of the latter treatment has been published, which concluded
                 that treatment did not confer an advantage.
            Distinguishing positional skull deformity from isolated lambdoid synostosis
            • Distinction made by clinical evaluation from observing patient’s head
              from above (Fig. 6.1).
            •	Positional skull deformity extremely common, isolated lambdoid
              synostosis very rare, particularly in a developmentally normal child.
            • For positional skull deformity:
              • on the side of the flattening, the ipsilateral ear is pushed forwards;
              • bossing of the ipsilateral frontal area;
              • bossing of the contralateral parietal area.
                        Torticollis and positional skull deformity                                     299


             (a)              Positional Plagiocephaly

                                                            Unilateral
                                                               frontal
               Contralateral
                                                                  bossing
                       frontal
                 flattening
                                                                      Anterior
                                                                       ear
                                                                        diplacement




                                                                   Unilateral
                                                                 Occipiotoparietal
         Contralateral                                          flattening
         Occipiotoparietal
                      bossing




             (b)              Lambdoid Synostosis

                     Contralateral
              frontal blossing




                                                                       Posterior
                                                                        ear
                                                                         displacement
           Contralateral
                parietal
               blossing
                                                                   Ipsilateral
                                                                occipitoparietal
                                                             flattening

Fig. 6. Differentiating positional skull deformity from isolated lambdoid synostosis.
Reprinted from Abbot R (ed) The ISPN Guide to Paediatric Neurosurgery © 2019—​International
Society for Pediatric Neurosurgery, with kind permission.

• For isolated lambdoid synostosis:
  • on the side of the flattening, the ipsilateral ear is pulled backwards;
  • bossing of the contralateral frontal and parietal areas.

Further reading
Collett, B.R. (2014). Helmet therapy for positional plagiocephaly and brachycephaly. BMJ 348: g2906.
30



     300    Chapter 6     Craniofacial surgery


           Craniofacial procedures
           Le Fort III osteotomy
           • Used for significant facial retrusion.
           •	Allows advancement of the whole face.
           • Can be a conventional procedure with bone grafting, plate, and
             screw fixation, or the advancement can be attained with distraction
             osteogenesis.
           • Distraction can utilize buried internal devices (with the activation rods
             exiting transcutaneously) which push the maxilla into its new position
             or external devices (halo frame) that pull the maxilla. It is possible to
             combine the two techniques to reduce the retention period with the
             external halo frame using the internal devices to hold the maxilla for the
             consolidation period.
           Surgical access
           • Coronal scalp incision.
           • Orbital floor approach (not always necessary) via lower eyelid or
             transconjunctival.
           • Intraoral approach for pterygoid dysjunction (may be approached from
             coronal incision).
           • See Chapter 5 for operative details; % Maxillary procedures, p. 242.
           Hazards
           •	Encroachment of cranial cavity with low anterior fossa and high cut
             through bridge of nose.
           •	Excessive bleeding particularly from pterygoid venous plexus.
           Modifications
           Can be combined with a simultaneous Le Fort I osteotomy to optimize aes-
           thetic and occlusal result.
           Fronto-​orbital advancement and cranial remodelling
           • Standard procedure for the management of craniosynostosis.
           • Numerous modifications and adaptations using both conventional
             fixation techniques (resorbable) and distraction osteogenesis.
           • In addition, there are procedures that involve remodelling without
             fronto-​orbital advancement that are used for sagittal synostosis or
             posterior skull procedures (Fig. 6.2).
           Surgical access
           • Coronal scalp incision.
           • Craniotomy to access the areas being recontoured.
           Bone cuts
           • Determined by the particular procedure in use.
           • Multiple modifications described.
           Hazards
           •	As the procedure is often performed on infants, blood loss can be
             significant even with the use of techniques such as cell savers.
           • Dural tears can occur particularly in those cases with raised ICP.
                                         Craniofacial procedures           301




Fig. 6.2 Fronto-​orbital advancement.

Monoblock advancement
• Modification of the fronto-​orbital advancement that incorporates the
  maxilla with the forehead (Fig. 6.3).
• Carried out conventionally or as a distraction osteogenesis procedure.
• Can be performed as part of an initial skull vault expansion procedure
  or as a second later procedure.
Surgical access
• Coronal scalp incision.
• Orbital floor approach (not always necessary) via lower eyelid or
  conjunctiva.




Fig. 6.3 Monoblock advancement.
302



      302    Chapter 6       Craniofacial surgery

            • Intraoral approach for pterygoid dysjunction (may be approached from
              bicoronal incision).
            • Frontal craniotomy.
            Hazards
            •	As for Le Fort III and fronto-​orbital advancement.
            • The risk of infection is heightened due to inherent communication
              between the nasal and cranial cavities.
            Facial bipartition
            • Further modification of the monoblock operation already described.
            • Involves dividing the detached fronto-​orbital bar/​maxilla in the sagittal
              plane allowing a rotational narrowing of widely spaced orbital cavities
              (hypertelorism) with the removal of a wedge of bone from the
              forehead/​bridge of nose (Fig. 6.4).
            •	Also has the effect of widening the maxilla at the palatal level.
            • Used in management of Apert syndrome.
            Surgical access
            •	As for the monoblock procedure.
            • In addition, it is often helpful to have exposure of the palate to facilitate
              the palatal cut.
            Hazards
            •	As for the monoblock procedure.
            •	Risk of oronasal fistula if palatal access obtained.
            Box osteotomy for hypertelorism
            Used for symmetrical or asymmetrical hypertelorism, as well as vertical or-
            bital discrepancies that involve the whole orbit.




            Fig. 6.4 Facial bipartition.
                                            Craniofacial procedures              303


Surgical access
• Coronal scalp incision.
• Frontal craniotomy.
• Orbital floor approach (transconjunctival or lower eyelid).
• Intraoral access is often helpful via an upper buccal sulcus incision.
Bone cuts
•	A cut through the orbital roof, medial wall, floor, and lateral orbital wall
  is made.
• Zygomatic arch is sectioned and the nasal bones cut.
Hazards
•	As for the monoblock procedure.
• Infraorbital nerve injury.
• Dental injuries, especially upper canine teeth.
304



      304    Chapter 6        Craniofacial surgery


            Craniofacial clefting disorders
            The most commonly used classification of the various complex craniofacial
            disorders is that proposed by Paul Tessier, who is rightly regarded as the
            father of craniofacial surgery. He proposed a simple numerical system
            ascribing a number to the soft tissue component and the bony component
            of the cleft (Fig. 6.5).
               Remarkably, in an era before cross-​sectional imaging, Tessier predicted
            clefts before he had seen clinical examples of them. There is always an as-
            sociation between a soft tissue cleft and the bony clefts, but the severity of
            each is variable.

                            (a)

                                                                        9

                                                                                8

                                                    3                                   7
                                                            4           6
                                                2
                                                                5
                                                                    7




                                          30




                            (b)
                                                                    3

                                                        2                       9


                                                    3                                       7
                                                                                    8

                                                            4               6
                                                                5
                                                                            7




                                         0          3

            Fig. 6.5 (a) Tessier classification of facial clefts. (b) Bony clefts of the face.
                                  Craniofacial clefting disorders               305


Principles of management
• Overall management planned to deal with the particular functional and
  anatomical abnormalities that each patient exhibits.
• In general, functional issues are dealt with in the first instance, e.g. if
  there are problems with scleral coverage that may result in corneal
  scarring and blindness. These must be addressed to prevent further
  complications.
• If the cleft involves a communication between the cranial cavity and
  the aerodigestive tract, then surgery to separate the two should be
  considered.
• In terms of surgery to correct the cleft and/​or hypertelorism, delay
  tends to produce better outcomes and limits the number of surgical
  interventions.
• Surgery always remains a balance between optimal outcome and the
  particular functional, developmental and psychological issues that the
  patient and his or her family are facing.
Encephalocoeles
• Neural tube defects where neural tissue herniates through or causes a
  skull defect.
• If herniating tissue only contains meninges, the defect is termed a
  meningocoele.
• Usually mid-​line lesions with posterior occipital encephalocoele, causing
  more in the way of functional problems.
• Craniofacial encephalocoeles may be frontal, ethmoidal, orbital, or
  sphenoidal.
• Herniated brain tissue is considered non-​functioning and can be
  resected without significant impairment.
•	Resultant defects can be closed with a variety of techniques, depending
  on size and location.
• In the frontal and ethmoidal group, hypertelorism is a common feature.
  Facial bipartition is a useful technique to normalize the orbital position
  and close the cleft.
Craniofrontonasal dysplasia
•   Clefting condition characterized by a mid-​line facial cleft.
•   Usually has an X-​linked inheritance pattern.
•   ♀ are usually more severely affected.
•   Hypertelorism and cleft nose can be treated following the principles of
    management described in % Craniofacial procedures, p. 300.
306



      306    Chapter 6     Craniofacial surgery


            Craniofacial tumours
            • Tumours that are defined by anatomy rather than pathology.
            • By their nature a heterogeneous group of malignant and benign
              tumours.
            • May be facial (or orbital) tumours that originate outside the cranial
              cavity and then grow to involve it, or they may originate from within the
              cranial cavity to involve the face.
            •	Each tumour must be managed on an individual basis, taking into
              account its anatomy and pathology. In addition, the therapeutic
              objective (curative or palliative) must be decided.
            •	Access may be with wide exposure and craniofacial bone disassembly,
              or using endoscopic techniques.
            • Surgical approach can be classified as:
              • transoral (including mid-​face degloving);
              • transnasal (endonasal, lateral rhinotomy or total rhinotomy);
              • transfacial (allows access to maxillary/​sphenoid/​ethmoid sinuses
                and pterygomaxillary space, via incision from medial canthus along
                nasojugal groove and through upper lip);
              • transcranial (anterior craniotomy);
              • lateral (posterior lateral/​pterygoid fissure/​petrosectomy
                approaches).
            • Key reconstructive consideration is sealing the cranial cavity from the
              aerodigestive tract. This can be achieved with local pericranial/​muscle/​
              galeal flaps or free tissue transfer.
Craniofacial tumours   307
308



      308    Chapter 6     Craniofacial surgery


            Vascular malformations of the head
            and neck
            The classification of vascular malformations is often complex, with multiple
            terms for the same pathology and similar terms for differing pathology.
            Vascular malformations
            The endothelial turnover is normal and, therefore, usually only gradually
            increase in size. However, it may be prone to more rapid growth with hor-
            monal changes such as pregnancy. High-​flow lesions can increase in size due
            to recruitment of adjacent vessels probably as a result of i blood flow.
            Low-​flow malformations
            Venous malformations
            • Can occur at any site and present with symptoms related to the site of
              origin.
            • Usually head and neck lesions are obvious with skin or mucosal
              discolouration that blanches on pressure. Often they become more
              prominent on straining, lying down, or in a head-​down position as the
              venous pressure increases (‘turkey wattle’ sign).
            •	Present at birth but may only become evident in infancy.
            • Diagnosis is both clinical and radiological.
            • Variety of imaging modalities are used:
              • duplex Doppler—​simple, non-​invasive method of differentiating high-​
                 flow from low-​flow lesions;
              • MRI/​MRA;
              • CT/​CTA;
              • conventional angiography.
            • Management primarily with interventional vascular radiological
              techniques utilizing sclerosant agents, such as absolute alcohol, sodium
              tetradecyl sulphate (STD), and bleomycin.
            • Surgery has a minor role in the complete excision of suitable lesions and
              debulking of larger lesions.
            Capillary malformations
            • Seen as superficial port wine stains.
            • Often confined to the distribution of a single branch of the
              trigeminal nerve.
            • May form a component of Sturge–​Weber syndrome.
            • Treatment can improve the appearance of the lesions. Usually carried
              out with a pulsed dye laser.
            • Surgery has minimal role.
            Lymphatic malformations
            • Often termed cystic hygromas.
            • Can be divided histologically into micro-​and macrocystic lesions.
            •	Aggressive surgical debulking may be necessary in the very large lesions,
              but the site often precludes surgical intervention.
              Vascular malformations of the head and neck                       309


• Infections, such as upper respiratory tract infection often cause dramatic
  and painful swelling of the lesion. Such infections should be treated
  aggressively with antibiotics and surgical drainage when a collection is
  identified.
• Injection of the lesion with sclerosant agents or OK423 (lyophilized
  group A haemolytic Streptococcus) are newer treatment modalities that
  may be useful.
Mixed lesions
• Not uncommon.
•	Presentation will depend on the proportions of the mix.
• Management as previously described.
For many of the lesions complete cure is unattainable and offering support
to help deal with the consequences of the resultant facial disfigurement is
very important. Camouflage make-​up techniques may also be helpful.
High-​flow malformations
Arteriovenous malformations
•	Present as pulsatile mass.
• Spontaneous haemorrhage and skin ulceration indicate a more
  aggressive lesion.
• The pathology is usually an abnormal connection between the arterial
  component and venous drainage missing out the damping effect of the
  capillary bed. This forms the nidus of the lesion.
•	As flow increases, the veins dilate and often become tortuous with
  additional small vessels being recruited to aid the venous drainage.
• In very large lesions a steal effect or high-​output cardiac failure
  may occur.
• Curative management is preoperative embolization (utilizing beads,
  coils, glue, Onyx® or PHIL®) followed by surgical resection of the lesion.
• In some cases, surgical resection is not possible and embolization
  alone is carried out. However, this carries the risk of recurrence and
  the development of collateral vessels that may make subsequent
  endovascular intervention more difficult.
Vascular tumours
• Haemangioma is the commonest childhood tumour.
• Not present at birth, but develops rapidly (proliferative phase) and
  present as a red, vascular lesion (strawberry naevus).
• Can occur at any site through H&N—​skin most common site (60%).
•	Proliferative phase usually reduces at 7–​10 months.
• Lesion gradually regresses until age of 7–​10 years.
• Treatment is expectant unless the lesion interferes with development,
  e.g. obstructing vision, on the developing vocal cords or is causing
  significant symptoms (recurrent bleeding).
• Initial active treatment is with beta-​blockers (propranolol).
• Intralesional and/​or systemic steroids, interferon, as well as surgery can
  be used for lesions that do not respond.
• If the lesion does not fully involute, laser treatment and/​or surgery may
  also be useful.
031



      310    Chapter 6     Craniofacial surgery


            Hemifacial microsomia
            • Commonest facial abnormality after cleft lip and palate.
            •	Also known as:
              • craniofacial microsomia;
              • first and second arch syndrome;
              •	Goldenhar syndrome;
              • oculoauriculovertebral syndrome.
            • Some reserve the term Goldenhar syndrome for those cases where
              there are significant cervical spine and visceral organ abnormalities.
            • Characterized by a 3D failure of growth affecting the orbit, mandible,
              ear (auricle), facial nerve, and overlying soft tissues.
            • Severity of abnormality for each component is variable, so that it is
              possible, for example, to have a severely affected mandible with normal
              facial nerve function.
            • Can occur bilaterally.
            • May be associated with cleft palate and macrostomia.
            •	Pathogenesis unclear. It has been suggested that an intrauterine vascular
              event affecting the stapedial artery is responsible.
            • Majority of cases are thought to be sporadic and multifactorial.
            • Small proportion may have an autosomal dominant or recessive
              inheritance pattern.
            • Number of classification systems used to score the severity and, hence,
              aid treatment:
              • OMENS;
              • OMENS-​Plus;
              •	Pruzanski as modified by Kaban (this only scores the mandibular
                 abnormality).1
            Management
            •	Aimed at dealing with functional problems first (associated cleft palate is
              treated as usual).
            • In early life, and in severe cases, breathing and feeding may be
              compromised. If these are problems and result from a very small
              mandible, intubation, feeding tube placement, and/​or tracheostomy
              may be necessary. In such cases early mandibular distraction may have
              a role.
            • The affected child should be monitored for developmental progress.
              Hearing assessments are mandatory. Increasingly, the use of bone-​
              anchored hearing aids is being advocated, even if contralateral hearing is
              normal.
            •	As the child develops (particularly towards the end of the mixed
              dentition), give consideration to:
              • mandibular reconstruction (utilizing costochondral grafting);
              • mandibular lengthening (utilizing distraction osteogenesis);
              • simultaneous Le Fort I osteotomy or active orthodontics to level
                 developing maxillary cant.
            •	As the child enters early teens, consider ear reconstruction:
              • dependent of the degree of pinna abnormality and patient wishes;
              • autologous reconstruction vs implant-​supported prosthesis.
                                                                Hemifacial microsomia                         311


•	As growth reaches completion, final stages of management should be
  considered:
  • conventional orthognathic surgery with pre-​and postsurgical
    orthodontics;
  • malar augmentation techniques;
  • finally soft tissue augmentation (fat transfer techniques, free tissue
    transfer, and fillers).
Reference
1. Bartlett, S., Ehrenfeld, M., Mast, G., Sugar, A. Hemifacial microsomia –​classification. AO. M https://​
   surgeryreference.aofoundation.org/​cmf/​congenital-​deformities/​hemifacial-​microsomia/​further-​
   reading/​hemifacial-​microsomia-​classification
231



      312    Chapter 6     Craniofacial surgery


            Treacher Collins syndrome
            •	Autosomal dominant disorder with variable penetrance.
            • 1/​50,000 live births.
            • Characteristic features include:
              • zygomatic bone abnormalities with bony clefting;
              • mandibular hypoplasia;
              • abnormally formed pinnae, external auditory canals, and middle ears;
              • high-​arched maxilla with clefts (30% of cases);
              • bilateral downward slanting of the palpebral fissures;
              • inferior placement of the lateral canthal ligaments;
              • true colobomas (25% of cases)—​a coloboma is a gap in part of the
                structures of an eye;
              • pseudocolobomas (50% of cases).

            Management
            • Similar to that of hemifacial microsomia.
            •	Early priorities are to deal with functional problems, particularly airway
              compromise secondary to mandibular hypoplasia.
            • Distraction osteogenesis has a significant role.
            • In severe cases, early tracheostomy may be necessary.
            •	A MDT addressing all the different aspects of care provides optimal
              management.
            • Malar reconstruction is best delayed until the age of ~9 years of age.
            • Definitive orthognathic surgery should be performed at the completion
              of growth.
                                               The craniofacial team              313


The craniofacial team
Key to the provision of modern craniofacial care is the multidisciplinary
craniofacial team that provides not only surgical skills, but also a wide range
of equally important talents to provide comprehensive care to this group
of patients. The model of organization will vary from unit to unit, but the
patient will need regular input from the following specialties:
• Neurosurgery.
• Craniofacial surgery—​OMFS and plastic surgery.
•	ENT surgery.
•	Genetics.
• Ophthalmology.
•	Psychology.
• Speech and language therapy.
• Orthodontics.
In addition, most patients may require intermittent input from one or more
of the following specialties:
•	Paediatrics (general).
•	Respiratory medicine.
•	Audiological medicine.
•	Endocrinology.
•	Paediatric dentistry.
There is significant overlap between the craniofacial team and the cleft lip/​
palate team in some units, particularly in the USA. On occasion the teams
are merged to operate as a cleft craniofacial team.
Key to the functioning of all craniofacial teams are clinical nurse special-
ists and psychologists, who provide much of the support and help that
families need.
431



      314    Chapter 6          Craniofacial surgery


            Organization of craniofacial services
            in the UK
            Craniofacial services in England and Wales are provided by four supraregional
            craniofacial centres (Great Ormond Street, London; Birmingham Children’s
            Hospital; Alder Hey Children’s Hospital, Liverpool; and Oxford Children’s
            Hospital). They are funded to provide services for the congenital paediatric
            cases requiring transcranial surgery, although they extend their services to
            adults and a wider case mix. In Scotland, The Scottish National Craniofacial
            Service for children and young people based at the Royal Hospital for
            Children, Glasgow, provides paediatric services and additionally provides
            adult services through the Regional Maxillofacial Unit. In Northern Ireland,
            single-​suture synostoses are treated locally, with support from the Liverpool
            supraregional service; more complex cases are transferred to Liverpool.
            Further reading
            Hayward, R., Jones, B., Dunaway, D., and Evans, R. (eds) (2004). The clinical management of
               craniosynostosis. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
            Posnick, J. (2000). Craniofacial and maxillofacial surgery in children and young adults. WB Saunders
               Company, Philadelphia, PA.

            Online resources
            Changing Faces (support group for patients with disfigurement): The Squire Centre, 33–​37 University
              Street, London WC1E 6JN, UK. E-​mail: info@changingfaces.org.uk. M www.changingfaces.org.
              uk. For young people: M http://​www.iface.org.uk. Scotland Tel: 0845 4500 640. Northern Ireland
              Tel: 0845 4500 732. M http://​www.changingfaces.org.uk/​Home
            Headlines (patients’ support group): Gil Ruff, 128 Beesmoor Road, Frampton Cotterell, Bristol BS36
              2JP, UK. Tel: +44 1454 850557. E-​mail GilRuff@headlines.org.uk; M http://​www.headlines.org.
              uk/​index.htm
 Chapter 7                   315



Cleft lip and palate
Incidence 316
Aetiology 317
Diagnosis 318
Management of lip 322
Management of palate 328
Management of alveolus 330
Revision procedures 336
Management of nose 340
Orthognathic surgery 342
Speech 344
Hearing 346
Orthodontics 348
Psychology 350
631



      316    Chapter 7     Cleft lip and palate


            Incidence
            • Commonest facial anomaly in the UK, ~1:1000 live births per year.
            • Cleft lip (CL), with or without cleft palate (CP), and isolated clefts of the
              palate are two distinct conditions.
            Cleft lip
            • May or may not be associated with CP.
            • Wide range of potential problems ranging from incomplete unilateral CL
              through complete unilateral cleft to bilateral cleft involving lip, alveolus,
              and palate.
            • Accounts for 60% of cleft lip and palate (CLP) cases:
              • 23.6% CL alone (unilateral or bilateral);
              • 21.6% unilateral cleft lip and palate (UCLP);
              • 10% bilateral cleft lip and palate (BCLP) (CRANE Database).
            • Racial variation in incidence:
              • common in Chinese people (~1:500);
              • less common in Afro-​Caribbean people (~1:2000).
            • Concordance rate in monozygotic twins ~60%.
            • 15–​30% have cleft as part of a syndrome:
              • Van der Woude;
              • hemifacial microsomia;
              • 22q11 microdeletion known as velocardiofacial syndrome or Di
                George syndrome;
              •	EEC—​ectrodactyly ectodermal dysplasia and clefting syndrome.

            Cleft palate
            • Accounts for other 44.8% of CLP (CRANE Database).
            • Range from complete clefts of hard and soft palate to partial incomplete
              clefts of the soft palate.
            • No racial variation, but i association with syndromes:
              • Stickler syndrome;
              • 22q11 microdeletion (velocardiofacial syndrome (VCF));
              • trisomy 13;
              • trisomy 18.
                                                              Aetiology        317


Aetiology
Multifactorial
Genetic and environmental factors implicated.
In utero/​maternal environmental factors
•   Anticonvulsants, such as phenobarbital and phenytoin (tenfold increase).
•   Alcohol use.
•   Cigarette smoking (twofold increase).
•   Folic acid deficiency.
•   Corticosteroids (threefold increase).
•   Hypoxia.
•   Retinoids (vitamin A).
Chromosome abnormalities
•   Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene on chromosome 1.
•   IRF6 on chromosome 1.
•   TGFA on chromosome 2.
•   MSX1 on chromosome 4.
•   BCL3 and TGFB on chromosome 10.
•   TGFB3 on chromosome 14.
•   RARA on chromosome 17.
•   Point mutations in genes FOXE1, GL12, MSX2, SK1, SATB2, and SPRY2
    may contribute to 6% of isolated CLP cases.
Genetic and environment interaction may increase risk
• Sixfold i risk if mother smokes cigarettes and has TGFA genotype on
  chromosome 2.
• A MSX1 defect on chromosome 4 increases the risk for mothers who
  drink alcohol or smoke cigarettes.
• Mothers are more susceptible to folate deficiency if they have MTHFR
  deficiency.
831



      318    Chapter 7     Cleft lip and palate


            Diagnosis
            Ultrasound
            • Possible to diagnose clefting as early as 12 weeks of gestation by
              transvaginal USS.
            • Diagnosis is made by obtaining coronal and frontal planes of fetal face.
            • Full anatomical survey is indicated if an oral cleft is diagnosed to rule out
              other associated syndromes.
            • Detection rate dependent on a number of factors:
              • experience of operator;
              • gestational age at the time of the study;
              • indication for the study;
              • technology used.
            • Cleft Lip and Palate Association (CLAPA) survey (2006) reported that
              45% of respondents had an antenatal diagnosis compared with only 15%
              in 1996.
            • 3D USS has been shown to increase diagnostic accuracy especially using
              the reverse face or ‘flip face’ view.
            • USS is more accurate in diagnosing isolated CL and CLP (67–​93%), but
              is limited in making the diagnosis of isolated CP (7–​22%) (see later).
            • Detection rates improve markedly after 20 weeks of gestation;
              therefore, patients with i risk of clefting and a normal early USS should
              have a repeat scan after 20 weeks.
            • 46% of all babies born with a cleft in 2017 were diagnosed antenatally.
            •	The proportion of children diagnosed antenatally varied significantly
              according to cleft type (p <0.001).
            • 69.0% CLs diagnosed antenatally in 2018.
            • 91.4% UCLPs diagnosed antenatally in 2018.
            • 92.4% BCLPs diagnosed antenatally in 2018.
            • 2.6% CP diagnosed antenatally in 2018 (CRANE Database).
            • Clefts may be classified by USS into five types:
              • type 1—​isolated CL;
              • type 2—​UCLP;
              • type 3—​BCLP;
              • type 4—​median CL;
              • type 5—​clefts associated with amniotic banding of limb–​body wall
                 complex.
            •	The type of the cleft has been correlated with chromosomal
              abnormalities, structural anomalies, and fetal death.
            •	The more severe the cleft, the greater the risk is of associated
              chromosomal abnormalities, structural anomalies, and fetal death.
            • Once a diagnosis has been made antenatally, parents should immediately
              be referred to the local cleft team for appropriate counselling and
              support.
            • False-​positive diagnoses do occur and patients should be informed
              accordingly.
                                                               Diagnosis        319


At birth
• In those cases where an antenatal diagnosis has not been made, the
  aim is to diagnose all clefts at birth and for parents to be contacted by a
  member of the local cleft team within 24h.
• 41.9% of all babies born with a cleft in 2017 were diagnosed at birth;
  late diagnosis (diagnosis after 24 hours after birth) of CP has previously
  been reported.
• In the years 2000–​2018, 2.2% of CPs were diagnosed antenatally, 66.4%
  at birth, 3.5% within 72 hours, 12.2% within a week of birth, 5.7% within
  a month of birth, 5.4% within 6 months of birth, and 4.5% 6 months or
  more after birth meaning that 31.4% of CPs were diagnosed late.
• In 2019, 2% of CPs were diagnosed antenatally, 73.7% at birth, 12.9%
  within 72 hours, 4.4% within a week of birth, 3.2% within a month of
  birth, 3.5% within 6 months of birth, and 0.3% 6 months or more after
  birth meaning that 24.3% of CPs were diagnosed late.
• Late diagnosis continues despite guidance issued by the Royal College of
  Paediatrics and Child Health in 2015, which recommends that healthcare
  professionals should examine a baby’s hard and soft palate as part of
  the full newborn physical examination and record this in the child health
  record; examination of the baby’s palate should be carried out by visual
  inspection and a torch and method of depressing the tongue should be
  used to visualize the whole palate.
• A designated cleft nurse specialist should be available to give further
  counselling and support to the family, where necessary including advice
  by telephone and home visits.
• Appropriate psychological support should be provided (see
  % Psychology, p. 350).
• Specialist feeding and nursing advice should be implemented at the time
  of birth.
•	The child and parent should be seen in a multidisciplinary outpatient
  clinic soon after birth by team members who will be involved in their
  long-​term care.
• Details of surgery should be discussed at this outpatient visit and dates
  for surgery provided where appropriate.
•	The parents should be taken to see the ward to familiarize them with
  the hospital facilities.
Genetic advice
• All parents given the option of genetic counselling at birth (particularly
  important if syndromic diagnosis is suspected).
•	Traditionally risk has been given as a percentage:
  • risk of having a second child with CL and/​or palate—​4%;
  • risk of having a third child—​10%;
  • risk if a member of the family has CLP to a first-​degree relative—​2%;
  • risk if a member of the family has CLP to a second-​degree
    relative—​0.7%;
  • risk if a member of the family has CLP third-​degree relative—​0.3%.
320



      320    Chapter 7     Cleft lip and palate

            • A Norwegian study has shown:
              • relative risk of cleft recurrence in first-​degree relatives is 32 for any
                CL and 56 for CP alone;
              • risk of clefts in children of affected mothers is similar to the risk of
                clefts in children of affected fathers;
              • the parent–​offspring risk is similar to the sibling–​sibling risk;
              • association between cleft severity and patient’s sex;
              • does not affect the risk of having a cleft.
            • Genetic counselling recommended to young adults with CL and/​or CP.
Diagnosis   321
32



     322    Chapter 7     Cleft lip and palate


           Management of lip
           Principles
           • Clefts of the lip cause cosmetic and functional problems.
           • Functional problems include impairment:
             • in the production of bilabial sounds (pa, pi);
             • of maxillary growth because of scar constriction.
           • Babies with isolated CL can usually feed normally, although they may
             have difficulty creating an adequate lip seal.
           Anatomical defect UCLP includes
           • Discontinuity of skin, muscle, and oral mucosa of the upper lip on
             cleft side.
           • Vertical soft tissue deficiency on medial aspect of the cleft.
           • Abnormal muscle insertions into nasal spine and alar base.
           • Alveolar cleft in region of the canine tooth.
           • Defect in primary palate anterior to the incisive foramen.
           • Rotation of septum, columella, and nasal spine away from the cleft.
           • Separation of domes of the alar cartilages at the nasal tip and kinking of
             the lateral crus on the cleft side.
           • Dislocation of lower and upper lateral cartilages on the cleft side.
           • Displacement of alar base in all three planes of space.
           • Displacement and flattening of the nasal bone on the cleft side.
           Anatomical defect in BCLP includes
           • Discontinuity of skin, muscle, and oral mucosa of the upper lip
             bilaterally.
           • Bilateral defect of alveolus and anterior palate.
           • Central segment consisting of prolabium and premaxilla with short
             columella.
           • Lack of orbicularis oris continuity.
           • Collapse of lateral palatal segments behind premaxilla.
           • Alar domes and middle crura are splayed, caudally rotated (bucket
             handle), and subluxed from their normal anatomical position overlying
             upper lateral cartilages.
           Surgical options
           • Lip repair is usually carried out at 3–​6 months in the UK.
           • Neonatal lip repair, while still practised in some units abroad, has fallen
             into disrepute in the UK.
           • Many different protocols for lip and palate repair worldwide.
           • Some protocols involve nasoalveolar moulding (NAM) and
             presurgical orthopaedics—​see % Management of nose, p. 340 and
             % Orthodontics, p. 348.
           • Protocols and timings given in the following sections reflect practice in
             most UK cleft centres.
                                                            Management of lip           323




Fig. 7. Vomer flap for hard palate repair in a right unilateral cleft of the lip and
palate.

Unilateral cleft lip and palate
•	The lip, nose, and anterior palate are repaired at the first surgery at 3–​
  6 months of age in healthy children.
• Anterior palate is repaired with an unlined turnover flap from the vomer
  (popularized by surgeons in Oslo, Norway). See Fig. 7.1.
Important steps in lip repair include:
• Skin incision design.
• Subperiosteal mobilization.
• Muscle repair.
• Nasal floor restoration.
• Alar base positioning and primary nasal dissection.
Design of skin incisions important to accomplish:
• Symmetry.
•	Equal lip length.
• Natural appearance of the cupid’s bow.
• Inconspicuous scarring and restoration of the nostril floor.
Many different techniques have been described for lip repair:
• Straight-​line techniques (Rose–​Thompson).
• Rotation advancement techniques (Millard, Delaire).
• Lower lip Z-​plasties (Tennison–​Randall).
• Combinations of these.
Individual techniques have advantages and disadvantages:
• Millard (Fig. 7.2):
  • scar mimics philtral column on cleft side;
  • reconstructs nasal sill;
  • allows some leniency in surgical technique (cut as you go);
  • may result in short lip on cleft side;
  • scar crosses philtral column at nasal base.
324



      324    Chapter 7        Cleft lip and palate




            Fig. 7.2 Millard lip repair.




            Fig. 7.3 Tennison lip repair.

            •	Tennison (Fig. 7.3):
              • useful for repairing a wide cleft;
              • may result in a long lip;
              • scar crosses philtral column inferiorly.
            Many now use a combination of these two techniques to take advantage
            of the strengths of each technique and discard the weaknesses (Fig. 7.4):
            • Radical subperiosteal mobilization of tissues of the cleft side (which
              includes incision through inelastic periosteal layer) to orbital rim,
              zygomatic process, and pyriform rim. It is important to ensure that
              muscle and skin is closed without undue tension; this also aids in
              accurate repositioning of the alar base.
            • Dissection and repair of orbicularis oris muscle.
            • Skin of the lip is dissected off the muscle medially and laterally.
            • Muscle repaired with resorbable or non-​resorbable sutures.
            • Primary bone grafting or gingivoperiosteoplasty (GPP) (at the time of lip
              repair) is not widely practised in the UK.
                                                       Management of lip      325




Fig. 7.4 Combination of Millard and Tennison repair.

• Primary bone grafting is thought to impair growth.
• GPP requires presurgical orthopaedics to bring the alveolar segments
  into close apposition.
• Presurgical orthopaedics for unilateral CLP patients is not routinely
  carried out in the UK.
• Repair of the nose (not done by all in the UK) is carried out by:
  • separating skin from the alar cartilage on the cleft side (as described
     by McComb and Andel);
  • approached both from lateral and medial aspects of the alar cartilage
     through the skin incisions already made for the lip repair;
  • repositioned structures of the nose are maintained using either buried
     slow-​resorbing sutures (e.g. PDS®) or external tie-​over splints.
Bilateral cleft lip and palate
• Very little conformity (2008 Surgical Interest Group meeting) in the
  UK about:
  • use of presurgical orthopaedics;
  • technique for repair;
  • timing of repair.
• Formal surgical repair is often preceded by presurgical orthopaedics
  to reposition the premaxilla posteriorly and align the lateral alveolar
  segments.
Principles of repair
• Symmetry should be maintained, meaning that repair of both sides
   should occur simultaneously (asynchronous lip repair is practised by
   three units in the UK and Ireland).
•	Establish primary muscle continuity (if undue muscle tension exists at
   time of primary repair then final muscle repair is deferred for about
   9 months to a year).
• Median tubercle may be reconstructed from either the prolabium (if
   patient has a well-​developed white roll on the prolabium) or from the
   lateral lip elements (if there is a poorly developed white roll on the
   prolabium).
326



      326    Chapter 7     Cleft lip and palate

            • Reconstruction of the labial sulcus from the prolabial mucosa and lateral
              lip elements (some rely on muscle action to create a labial sulcus and do
              not formally reconstruct the sulcus).
            • Hard palate repair varies widely and includes:
              • complete closure with a vomer flap on both sides;
              • complete closure on one side with a full vomer flap and partial repair
                 of the opposite side with a vomer flap raised up to the pre-​vomerine
                 suture;
              • complete closure on one side only leaving the contralateral side open.
            • Variation in hard palate repair exists because raising a full bilateral
              vomerine flap may compromise blood supply to the premaxilla, but
              raising the flap to the pre-​vomerine suture and no further is thought to
              maintain the blood supply to the premaxilla. If only one side is repaired
              at the first surgery, then the child is brought back after approximately 6
              weeks to close the contralateral side with a vomer flap.
            •	The nose is repaired as described previously for unilateral patients
              except both sides of the nose are dissected and primary positioning of
              the alar cartilages is carried out to construct the nasal tip and columella.
            Incomplete lip
            • Principles are the same as for complete cases and a functional repair
               should always be carried out.
            • It is also important to address the nose in incomplete cases as there is
               usually a lip/​nose deformity.
Management of lip   327
328



      328    Chapter 7       Cleft lip and palate


            Management of palate
            Principles
            • Functional palatal repair is important for speech and may be important
              for Eustachian tube (EUT) function.
            •	Timing of palatal repair is controversial:
              • early closure prior to 1 year has been shown to benefit speech;
              • delayed hard palate closure has only shown consistently improved
                growth when delayed into adolescence, but this results in
                unacceptably poor speech.
            • Common practice in the UK is to close the soft palate in CLP patients
              and the entire palate in isolated CPs between 6–​9 months.
            • Underlying deformity includes (Fig. 7.5):
              • narrow and vertically displaced palatal shelves;
              • abnormal insertion of palatal muscles;
              • abnormal muscle in syndromic patients.

            Surgical options
            • Hard palate in complete CLP patients is repaired in the UK using a
              vomer flap (see % Management of lip, p. 322). See Fig. 7.1, p. 323.
            • Many different techniques have been used to close the palate including:
              • Von Langenbeck;
              • Widmaier;
              • Veau–​Wardill–​Kilner;
              • Bardach two-​flap technique with intravelar veloplasty;
              • Furlow double opposing Z-​plasty;
              • Sommerlad radical microdissection.
            • Von Langenbeck releasing incisions are still used in wide clefts.




                Cleft side:                                       Non-cleft side:
                - short soft palate                               - normal muscular
                - abnormal muscle insertion                         slings
                  into hard palate and cleft




            Fig. 7.5 Palatal muscles—​normal vs cleft side.
                                               Management of palate              329


• Veau–​Wardill–​Kilner push-​back techniques still widely used in some
  countries, but abandoned in the UK because of:
  • unfavourable midfacial growth;
  • compromised dental arch form;
  • difficult to manage fistulae;
  • excessive palatal scarring;
  • poor speech outcome.
• Sommerlad repair of the palate with microscopic magnification
  recreation of the levator veli palatini sling is widely practised in the UK.
  Procedure involves:
  • incision along cleft margin at junction of oral and nasal mucosa;
  • mobilization mucoperiosteum of hard palate in subperiosteal plane;
  • separation oral mucosa with minor salivary glands from muscles and
    nasal mucosa;
  • division of oral insertion of tensor veli palatini tendon;
  • suturing nasal layer with soft palate muscles still attached;
  • separation of tensor veli palatini and palatopharyngeus from the back
    of the hard palate;
  • dissection levator veli palatini from the nasal mucosa keeping the nasal
    mucosa intact;
  • alignment of the levators transversely and suture of the levators
    together in the midline to reconstitute the levator sling;
  • closure of oral layer using resorbable sutures;
  • lateral releasing incisions in the oral layer (von Langenbeck) are used
    to reduce tension on the oral repair in <15% of cases (usually only) in
    extremely wide clefts;
  • 5% of patients repaired using the Sommerlad technique have required
    secondary speech surgery.
•	The Bardach double flap:
  • widely practised in the USA;
  • hard palate is raised as two flaps subperiosteally giving access to soft
    palate musculature, which is repaired with an intravelar veloplasy;
  • secondary speech surgery needed in >20% of patients.
• Furlow double opposing Z-​plasty:
  • widely practised in the USA;
  • lengthens the palate and re-​aligns levator veli palatini muscles;
  • difficult in wide clefts;
  • asymmetrical repair;
  • normal or near normal speech reported in >85% of patients.
30



     330       Chapter 7    Cleft lip and palate


           Management of alveolus
           Aims of alveolar bone graft
           •   Stabilize alveolar arch.
           •   Restore arch integrity.
           •   Allow teeth to erupt into optimal position.
           •   Permit orthodontic alignment of arch.
           •   Simultaneous oronasal fistula repair.
           •   Creation of a platform for prosthetic replacement, e.g. implants.
           •   Optimize maxillary surgery.
           •   Create support for the nose (alar base) and lip.
           Assessment
           • OPT and occlusal radiograph.
           • Periapical radiograph if necessary.
           • CBCT scanning (becoming more popular).
           • Important to decide whether tooth extractions need to be done at the
             time or at least 3 months before to allow attached gingiva to heal.
           • Presurgical orthodontic treatment to align alveolar segments and
             optimize position of teeth adjacent to the cleft.
           Principles of surgery
           • Pioneered by Boyne and Sands.
           • Mucoperiosteal flaps are raised on both sides of the cleft on the buccal
             and palatal sides (Fig. 7.6).
           • Reconstruction of nasal layer and create a nasal seal.
           • Nasal dissection superiorly up to the piriform rim and nasal floor.
           • Some place collagen membrane below the nasal layer to improve the
             nasal seal.
           • Bone is packed into the space between the nasal layer and oral layer
             bridging the alveolar segments, and should extend posteriorly into the
             palatal cleft, superiorly to the nasal floor, and laterally to the paranasal
             region.
           • Defect should be over-​filled as resorption of up to 30% may occur.




           Fig. 7.6 Alveolar bone graft—​flaps raised and nasal layer closed.
                                           Management of alveolus               331


• Oral closure is affected by advancing the lateral buccal mucoperiosteal
  flap medially to create an oral seal.
• Lateral buccal flap advancement will leave exposed alveolar bone
  laterally, which will heal by secondary intention without complication.
• Postsurgical orthodontics follows to provide stability, while bone graft is
  incorporated and heals.
Outcome assessment of alveolar bone
Outcome assessment of grafting is based on:
• Success of fistula closure.
•	Eruption of canine and bony support for adjacent teeth.
• Objective radiographic measurement using panoramic and occlusal
  radiographs to assess bone height, and more recently conventional or
  CBCT to assess bone height and width.
• Common rating scales include the Bergland, Kindelan, and Chelsea
  (Witherow) scales.
• Bergland scale compares the level of the interdental septum on the
  grafted side to the normal side and the aim is to achieve grade I or II:
  • grade I: normal height;
  • grade II: >75% normal height;
  • grade III: 50–​75% normal height;
  • grade IV: < 50%.

Timing
Primary bone grafting (at time of lip repair 3–​6 months of age)
• Began in the 1950s.
• Carried out at same time as lip repair with wide dissection and bone
   (split rib) used to bridge gap.
• Abandoned by all in original form as shown to severely inhibit maxillary
   growth.
• Primary grafting still part of the treatment protocol in some units in the
   USA, but in a modified form.
Gingivoperioplasty
• Increasing support in recent times in some USA and European centres.
• Requires presurgical orthopaedics to bring alveolar segments into near
  contact.
• Gingival flaps adjacent to the cleft are raised, taking care not to damage
  underlying tooth germs, and sutured together.
•	Evidence that GPP decreases the need for alveolar bone grafting later.
• If alveolar bone grafting is needed later, there is limited evidence to
  suggest that those patients initially treated with GPP have a better
  outcome.
• Others have shown that secondary bone grafting is superior to GPP and
  counsel against GPP.
• GPP still not universally supported because of:
  • lack of long-​term maxillary growth studies;
  • lack of consistent results between centres;
  • burden of care for parents.
32



     332    Chapter 7     Cleft lip and palate

           Early secondary (2–​5 years)
           • May improve periodontal support for central incisor on the cleft side
             and facilitate lateral incisor eruption if present.
           •	Early post-​grafting orthodontics to correct incisor crossbite at this age
             may improve horizontal maxillary hypoplasia.
           • Disadvantages include orthodontic compliance and prolonged
             orthodontic treatment.
           • Not widely practised as there is a lack of long-​term maxillary growth
             outcome data.
           Secondary (6–​13 years): in the mixed dentition
           • Most commonly applied technique in the UK.
           •	Timing determined by development of the canine tooth on the
             cleft side.
           • Grafting is carried out when the canine root is half to two-​thirds
             formed.
           • Allows eruption of the canine into the newly grafted zone.
           •	Established technique with long-​term growth and dental outcomes.
           Late (>13 years): in the permanent dentition
           •	This results in poor outcome with:
             • compromised periodontium;
             • i tooth loss adjacent to cleft;
             • more need for prosthodontic rehabilitation;
             • higher fistula rate;
             • poor alar base support.
           • Not recommended in the UK for planned care.
           At time of Le Fort I maxillary osteotomy
           Not recommended as maxillary segments are not in continuity and it is
           easier to complete osteotomy if the maxilla is in one piece.
           Donor site (for secondary alveolar bone grafting)
           • Grafting material for alveolar bone grafting may be autogenous,
             xenogenic, allogenic, or alloplastic.
           • Particulate bone grafts are superior to block cortical or
             corticocancellous grafts because they are more readily incorporated
             into the alveolus with the capacity for postoperative remodelling.
           • Several autogenous donor sites have been used for alveolar bone
             grafting including iliac crest, rib, calvarium, tibia, and mandibular
             symphysis.
           Iliac crest
           • Regarded as the gold standard for alveolar bone grafting.
           • Advantages:
               • rich in osteogenic cells;
               • rapidly transformed into alveolar bone;
               • substantial amounts of cancellous bone can be easily obtained;
               • two-​team operating shortens procedure time;
               • excellent long-​term outcomes have been reported.
                                           Management of alveolus            333


• Disadvantages relate to donor site morbidity:
  • prolonged postoperative pain;
  • gait disturbances;
  • long hospital stay;
  • unsightly scars;
  • sensory disturbance (neuropraxia of lateral cutaneous nerve of thigh).
• Immediate postoperative pain control using infusion techniques and
  minimally invasive harvesting techniques using trephines have reduced
  the morbidity significantly.
Calvarial bone
• Advantages:
  • minimal scarring;
  • minimal postoperative pain;
  • mesenchymal bone.
• Disadvantages:
  • cortical bone with minimal cancellous bone;
  • small volumes;
  • dural tears and infections;
  • osteogenic potential of graft affected by technique used;
  • single team operating.
• Results not as good as iliac crest.
Tibia
• Advantages:
  • ease of harvest;
  • minimal morbidity (pain, infections);
  • good long-​term outcomes;
  • two-​team operating.
• Disadvantages:
  • scarring;
  • limited volume of bone;
  • tibial plateau fractures in up to 2.7% of cases.

Mandibular symphysis
• Method of choice in some centres in Europe.
• Advantages:
  • mesenchymal bone;
  • no visible scar;
  • minimal pain and shortened hospital stay;
  • satisfactory long-​term outcomes.
• Disadvantages:
  • single team operating;
  • technically difficult with significant learning curve;
  • damage to the mandibular permanent tooth germs with subsequent
    tooth loss;
  • limited amount of bone.

Rib
Now abandoned as:
• Significant resorption.
• Poor long-​term outcome.
34



     334    Chapter 7     Cleft lip and palate

           Bone substitutes
           • Advantages: no donor site morbidity.
           • Disadvantages:
             • slower graft revascularization;
             • long-​term results equivocal;
             • unpredictable bone formation;
             • unpredictable resorption.
           •	The use of bone substitutes is still not recommended in children.
           Bone morphogenetic proteins
           • Has shown promise in a number of animal models.
           • May replace autogenous grafting in the future, but a suitable carrier in
             humans still to be found.
Management of alveolus   335
36



     336    Chapter 7     Cleft lip and palate


           Revision procedures
           Lip
           • Residual imperfections and imbalances may occur following primary
             repair as a result of:
             • poor alignment at the time of surgery;
             • distortion during growth;
             • scar contracture;
             • closure under tension in wide clefts;
             • poor muscle reconstruction.
           • Lip distortions should be evaluated together with the nose, bony
             skeleton, and dentition.
           • Underlying skeletal imbalance will be reflected in the soft tissue drape
             and should be considered when planning lip revision (especially in the
             older child and adolescent).
           • Lip revision is indicated for:
             • lip length discrepancies;
             • vermillion deformities;
             • mucosal excess or deficiency;
             • inadequate muscle reconstruction;
             • poor cutaneous scars.
           •	Each deformity should be considered on its merits.
           • Mucosal and vermillion deformities can often be treated using:
             • local flaps;
             • Z-​plasties;
             • V–​Y advancements.
           • Lip length discrepancies, poor cutaneous scarring, and inadequate
             muscle reconstruction usually requires formal revision of the entire
             lip, rather than an attempt to improve the deformities with limited
             intervention.
           •	Timing of lip revision may vary and the decision to treat is taken
             together with parents and child (older children and adolescents will
             often make their own decisions).
           • Obvious deformity should, where possible, be treated before the child
             starts school to facilitate integration and avoid stigmatization.
           • In uncertainty or parental conflict the clinical psychologist should be
             involved.
           Palate
           Revisional surgery of the palate is indicated for two main reasons:
           • Velopharyngeal incompetence (VPI) secondary to physical inadequacy
             of the velopharyngeal mechanism.
           • Repair of oronasal fistulae.
           Surgery for VPI
           Philosophies vary from unit to unit regarding optimizing palatal function as
           identified by videofluoroscopy vs obturating the velopharyngeal gap identi-
           fied on nasoendoscopy.
                                                  Revision procedures          337


Assessment
• Speech.
• Clinical examination.
• Lateral videofluoroscopy.
• Nasoendoscopy.
Surgical options based on fluoroscopy include:
• Palatal re-​repair to posteriorly reposition levator palatini in the velum
   and utilize the full length of the palate.
• Oral Z-​plasy to gain length together with levator palatini repositioning
   surgery (Furlow’s reverse Z-​plasty).
• Hyne’s pharyngoplasty.
• Coleman fat transfer.
• Buccal interpositional flaps.
• Z-​plasty of the oral layer.
• Speech prosthesis.
• Superiorly based pharyngeal flap.
In summary, the aim of this philosophy of treatment is to provide an op-
timally functioning palate in the first instance and to address the anatom-
ical abnormalities that exist thereafter, without creating permanent airway
obstruction.
   Nasoendoscopic diagnosis is useful:
• In those with a coronal closing pattern and a velopharyngeal gap
   laterally. The aim of surgery is to close the lateral gaps (most commonly
   carried out with an Orticochea or Jackson sphincter pharyngoplasty).
• In those with a lateral ‘sphincteric’ closing pattern with a gap in the
   midline. The aim of surgery is to close the midline gap with a midline
   pharyngeal flap pedicled either superiorly or inferiorly and tailored to
   the size of the gap.
These surgical options will tether the velum, narrow the velopharyngeal
airway, and create a permanent obstruction with potential obstructive
sequelae.
   Speech in cleft patients has a tendency to deteriorate with age because
of the relative increase in pharyngeal size due to growth, adenoid lymphoid
tissue involution, and pharyngeal shape change. This means long-​term
follow-​up into adulthood.
Surgery for oronasal fistulae
• Common sequelae of CP repair.
• May represent a failure in technique or a problem in wound healing,
  which is often a result of excessive tension.
• Reported incidence varies widely (0–​34%).
• Incidence is related to the extent of clefting and surgical technique, but
  not age at the time of palatoplasty or sex.
• Symptoms associated with oronasal fistulae include:
  • audible nasal air escape during speech;
  • hypernasality;
  • food regurgitation into nose.
• Not all fistulae are symptomatic and not all require intervention.
38



     338    Chapter 7     Cleft lip and palate

           •	The decision to treat fistulae is determined on an individual basis, and is
              guided by speech assessment and patient morbidity.
           • Successful fistula repair improves symptoms directly associated with the
              fistula and velopharyngeal function, therefore an existing symptomatic
              fistula should be repaired before embarking on formal velopharyngeal
              management.
           Fistula repair is often technically challenging because of:
           • excessive scarring;
           • lack of virgin local tissue;
           • ease of access.
           No single technique is consistently satisfactory and reported rate of suc-
           cessful closure varies from 33% to 90%. Many different techniques for
           closure have been described broadly divided into:
           • Local soft tissue flaps (turnover flaps, rotation flaps, island flaps).
           • Local soft tissue flaps with interpositional grafts (conchal cartilage,
              alloplastic materials such as PDS®, collagen membranes).
           • Regional intraoral (tongue flaps, buccal flaps, facial artery myomucosal
              flaps).
           •	Extraoral (nasolabial).
           • Free tissue transfer (radial forearm, fibula flaps for composite
              reconstruction).
           The technique chosen is based upon:
           • Position and size of the fistula.
           • Nature and number of previous attempted repairs.
           The basic fundamental principle in repairing oronasal fistulae is to repair
           the defect in layers (especially ensuring adequate repair of the nasal layer).
           The addition of conchal cartilage or alloplastic interpositional grafting has
           improved success rates.
Revision procedures   339
340



      340    Chapter 7     Cleft lip and palate


            Management of nose
            Nasoalveolar moulding
            • Forms part of presurgical infant orthopaedic protocol in some centres
              around the world.
            • Found in some inter-​centre comparison trials to improve nasal
              symmetry when compared to centres not using NAM or infant
              orthopaedics.
            • Systematic reviews have either found a tendency for NAM to improve
              nasal form or not enough evidence to support the use of NAM.
            • Concerns about NAM have focused on i burden of care without
              evidenced improvements over the long term; some studies, however,
              have found that NAM, which requires substantial parental input, helps to
              alleviate parental anxiety associated with having a child with a cleft.
            • NAM not used in the UK units currently.
            Primary
            • Primary repair carried out at the time as primary lip repair.
            • Historically, it was believed that primary surgery to the nose would
               compromise nasal growth and was therefore discouraged.
            • Long-​term outcomes of a consecutive series of unilateral and bilateral
               cases showed that primary rhinoplasty does not compromise nasal
               growth and paved the way for a more aggressive approach to the nose
               at the time of primary lip repair.
            • Various techniques to maintain cartilage repositioning following surgery
               include:
               • external and internal suspensory sutures;
               • temporary tie-​over splints;
               • longer-​term internal and external silicone splints.

            Secondary
            The nose, despite improved results following primary rhinoplasty at the
            time of lip repair, often requires adjustment on more than one occasion.
            Early secondary rhinoplasty
            • Age 3 years to adolescence, but often prior to school attendance.
            • Carried out to improve appearance of the nose to avoid peer ridicule
              and specifically to address:
              • obvious deformities of the tip, lower lateral cartilage, and alar base in
                 UCLP patients;
              • shortened columella, tip deformities, and widened alar bases in BCLP
                 patients.
            • Access to the nose may be via a rim incision in milder cases or more
              commonly through a transcolumellar open tip approach.
            Complete septorhinoplasty
            • Vomer osteotomies and grafting where necessary.
            • Delayed until skeletal maturation is complete.
            • Should also only be carried out after orthognathic surgery has been
              undertaken.
                                               Management of nose             341


• Cleft nose deformity is complex and has usually been operated on more
  than one occasion, increasing the difficulty of the surgery.
• Unless only very minor adjustments are indicated, complete cleft
  septorhinoplasties should be carried out as open procedures.
• Important to try to address the patient’s concerns and wishes as long as
  these are realistic.
• Patients benefit from at least one session with the team psychologist to:
  • help them articulate their concerns;
  • gauge their expectations;
  • prepare them for surgery.
342



      342    Chapter 7     Cleft lip and palate


            Orthognathic surgery
            • Need for orthognathic surgery varies according to cleft type.
            • Lack of maxillary growth may be inherent, but is probably a
              consequence of soft tissue scarring following primary surgery.
            • Improved primary surgical technique means that maxillary growth is
              compromised less.
            • Commonly the maxilla is hypoplastic in all three planes of space
              resulting in:
              • skeletal Class III jaw relationship;
              • maxillary narrowing (maxillary transverse discrepancy);
              • d facial height.
            • Bimaxillary surgery is commonly indicated, and may include all or a
              combination of the following:
              • maxillary advancement;
              • maxillary down-​g rafting;
              • segmental maxillary surgery;
              • mandibular setback;
              • genioplasty.

            Traditional orthognathic surgery
            Challenging because:
            • Large movements often required.
            •	Extensive scarring from previous surgery makes mobilization and
              retention of final position difficult.
            • Presence of a pharyngeal flap.
            • Abnormal bony anatomy with potential to compromise the blood
              supply to the premaxilla in bilateral cleft cases.
            • i tendency to relapse.
            • Despite all of these challenges, relapse can be overcome by:
              • aggressive mobilization;
              • adjunctive bone grafting;
              • rigid fixation.
            •	There is recent evidence to show that rate of relapse in traditional
              orthognathic surgery is comparable to distraction osteogenesis
              regardless of the distance moved.
            •	Traditional orthognathic surgery has the following advantages:
              • more cost-​effective than distraction;
              • patient only needs one procedure;
              • patient does not have the burden of prolonged treatment with
                unsightly distractors.
            Distraction osteogenesis
            • Provides alternative to traditional orthognathic surgery especially in
              cases that require large movements.
            • Use external or internal distractors.
            • Advance 1mm/​day after carrying out Le Fort 1 cuts.
                                            Orthognathic surgery              343


• Advantages:
  • in some series evidence that there may be less relapse especially after
    large advancements when distraction is used (not replicated in all
    studies);
  • may affect speech less;
  • able to adjust if speech becomes compromised.
• Disadvantages:
  • need to wear unsightly frame for 6–​8 weeks if using external
    distraction with negative psychological consequences;
  • expensive equipment;
  • extensive work-​up if internal distraction is planned;
  • need for more than one surgical procedure.

Effect of orthognathic surgery/​distraction on speech
• It is important to be aware that maxillary advancement may
  compromise VPI function and speech.
• Preoperative speech assessment will give an indication of the risk of
  developing VPI, but there is no method that will reliably predict which
  patients will develop VPI. This is partly because:
  • it is not possible to adequately assess palatal functional reserve;
  • development of VPI post maxillary advancement is not always related
     to the distance moved.
• Pre-​orthognathic/​distraction speech investigations include:
  • speech and language therapy assessment;
  • lateral videofluoroscopy;
  • nasal endoscopy.
•	The chances of VPI developing can be minimized by:
  • careful planning and preoperative assessment;
  • bimaxillary surgery to minimize maxillary movement;
  • possibly by utilizing distraction techniques.
34



     344    Chapter 7      Cleft lip and palate


           Speech
           •	The development of speech is lengthy and complex, and usually
             proceeds through a number of stages.
           •	The process is dependent on several factors, including the ability to hear
             and the presence of an intact velopharyngeal mechanism. Cleft patients
             may be compromised on both fronts.
           •	The palate separates the oral and nasal cavity with the soft palate
             permitting two-​way air flow at the velopharyngeal orifice.
           •	The soft palate is able to close off the nasal airway during speech.
             This enables the voice to be shaped by the mouth or oropharynx,
             and is therefore critical for the production of oral sounds. In addition
             to contributing to the speech mechanism, elevation of the soft palate
             during swallowing prevents food/​fluids passing into the nasopharynx.
           •	English speakers need to produce oral pressure to make all sounds apart
             from /​m/​, /​n/​ and ‘ng’.
           • In the normal palate, the levator veli palitini muscles run transversely
             across the central 40–​50% of the palate and on contraction the palate is
             lifted to close the velopharynx.
           • In CP and submucous CP the levator veli palitini muscle insertions are abnormal:
             • in CP they insert into the side of the cleft;
             • in submucous CP they are discontinuous and variably anteriorly
                 displaced.
           •	The presence of a CP results in deviant and restricted sound
             development and influences pre-​speech development in cleft children.
             This can continue to have an influence on speech development after
             the palate has been repaired even in those children with competent
             velopharyngeal mechanisms.
           •	Early babble patterns are indicative of how later speech may develop
             and this has influenced the timing of palatal repair.
           •	The palate is usually repaired by the age of 12 months and in many cases
             earlier.
           •	The consequence of poor palatal function is poor speech. This can have
             consequences for later academic achievement as well as social integration.
           •	The aim of palatal surgery is to provide the patient with an adequately
             functioning velopharyngeal sphincter.
           • A velopharyngeal sphincter that is not adequate can result in VPI,
             sometimes also referred to as velopharyngeal dysfunction (VPD).
           • VPI in cleft patients may result from:
             • poor palatal function after surgical repair;
             • undiagnosed submucous clefts of the palate;
             • palatal–​pharyngeal disproportion;
             • neuromuscular dysfunction.
           • VPI results in resonance and/​or airflow errors which may present as:
             • hypernasality;
             • hyponasality;
             • mixed resonance;
             • nasal emission;
             • nasal turbulence;
             • nasal facial grimace;
             • weak/​nasalized consonants.
                                                                Speech       345


• CP and VPI can result in the following cleft-​type articulation errors:
  • palatal realization;
  • lateral realization;
  • non-​oral articulations;
  • nasal realizations.
•	These speech problems can also be related to other abnormal oral and/​
  or nasal structures associated with cleft patients including:
  • nasal obstruction;
  • oronasal fistulae;
  • dental malocclusions;
  • jaw skeletal abnormalities.
• Cleft speech is therefore complex and requires assessment and
  treatment by speech and language therapists specifically trained in and
  dedicated to cleft patients.
Speech assessment
The role of the speech and language therapist is to:
• Assess speech.
• Determine the relationship between speech and structure.
• Devise appropriate treatment strategies.
Speech assessment can be divided into:
• Perceptual listening.
• Clinical examination.
• Use of adjunctive investigations.
Role of speech therapy
Speech therapy can be divided into:
• Articulation therapy:
  • the focus of treatment for cleft patients is to modify place of
    articulation to more anterior positions consistent with normal speech;
  • even in patients with hypernasality, improvement in placement of
    consonant articulation will have a positive effect on intelligibility;
  • patient outcome is improved if therapy is offered on a frequent basis
    (more than weekly).
• Resonance therapy:
  • the majority of resonance disorders will require surgery;
  • for some patients whose assessment has shown potential for
    velopharyngeal closure on videofluoroscopy, there is emerging
    evidence that therapy using nasometry may be of some benefit.
• Biofeedback therapy:
  • biofeedback therapy may be successful in certain selected cases
    and has the advantage that the patient and the therapist are able to
    monitor the outcome of the intervention and in so doing change
    speech behaviour;
  • disadvantages of biofeedback include the need for expensive
    equipment, as well as patient dedication and compliance. Examples
    include nasometry electropalatography (EPG), and USS.
• Voice therapy:
  • the abnormalities of voice seen in cleft patients are often a response
    to velopharyngeal dysfunction and this needs to be addressed
    accordingly.
346



      346    Chapter 7     Cleft lip and palate


            Hearing
            • Normal hearing is necessary for speech development.
            •	EUT dysfunction with permanent hearing loss is common in CP.
            • Impaired active dilatation and EUT dysfunction has been found in 100%
              of non-​operated CP patients.
            •	The pathophysiology of EUT dysfunction is related to:
              • muscle pull;
              • oronasal reflux, which causes mucosal irritation, oedema, and tubal
                 occlusion (all of which contribute to hearing loss).
            • Functional palatal surgery improves velopharyngeal closure preventing
              reflux and allows tubal oedema to resolve.
            • Air insufflation, viewed as an index of EUT function, has shown
              improvement in passive opening of the EUT following CP repair, but no
              difference in active opening due to muscular contraction.
            • A high percentage of patients with CP will develop otitis media with
              effusion (OME) despite functional palatal surgery and all of these
              patients therefore require careful ENT and audiological surveillance
              throughout their childhood within the MDT setting.
            • Some teams opt for aggressive short-​term ventilation based on the
              finding that OME is almost universal in the CP population.
            • Others will only place ventilation tubes if there is OME with significant
              hearing loss (>55dBnHL on auditory-​evoked brain stem response in the
              better ear).
            •	The NICE review on the current evidence on OME in children with CP
              concluded that there is a lack of evidence on the optimal treatment.
            •	Treatment should, therefore, be based on the needs of the
              individual child.
            • Insertion of ventilation tubes at the time of primary lip or palate closure
              should only be carried out after careful otological and audiological
              assessment, and not inserted routinely.
            •	There is some case-​review evidence for the effectiveness of hearing aids
              in these children and the alternative of early aiding should therefore be
              considered.
            • NICE recommends the insertion of ventilation tubes as an alternative to
              hearing aids in children with CP who have persistent bilateral OME, and
              a hearing level in the better ear of 25–​30dBHL or worse confirmed over
              3 months.
            • Some clinicians involved in the management of CP are concerned that
              the hearing level of 25–​30dBHL recommended by NICE may precipitate
              an increase in the number of children undergoing ventilation tube
              insertion with their attendant complications.
Hearing   347
348



      348    Chapter 7     Cleft lip and palate


            Orthodontics
            The role of the orthodontist is central to the care of patients with CLP
            characterized by involvement throughout their development, beginning
            soon after birth and continuing through to the end of growth.
            • In the early stages, the orthodontist maybe involved in presurgical infant
              orthopaedics.
            • In the mixed dentition, the orthodontist prepares the patient for
              secondary alveolar bone grafting.
            • In the adolescent, the orthodontist will carry out definitive orthodontic
              treatment separately or as part of a combined surgical orthodontic
              (orthognathic) treatment plan.
            Pre-​lip surgery
            Orthodontic involvement may include:
            • Primary impressions.
            • Fabrication of:
              • feeding plates (now felt to be ineffectual);
              • plates to protect the vomer from ulceration;
              • plates to prevent tongue displacement into the palatal cleft in patients
                with Pierre–​Robin sequence.
            • Presurgical infant orthopaedics with or without NAM (see
              % Management of nose, p. 340).
            •	The use of infant orthopaedics is not commonly used in the UK for
              UCLP as the current evidence does not show an improvement in
              outcome but increases the burden of care.
            • IO for improving the position of the premaxilla in BCLP is sometimes
              employed in the UK.
            Pre-​alveolar bone graft
            Primary dentition
            Orthodontics in the primary dentition is rare and is limited to treatment of
            anterior cross-​bites.
            Mixed dentition
            • Orthodontics in the mixed dentition is mainly carried out to prepare the
              maxillary arches for bone grafting.
            •	The timing of therapy is based upon the development of the canine
              tooth in most units in the UK with the aim being to carry out grafting
              when the canine root is half to two-​thirds formed, as stability of the
              bone graft is dependent on the presence of teeth within the area of
              the graft.
            • Pre-​alveolar bone grafting orthodontics is carried out to:
              • approximate alveolar segments;
              • move adjacent teeth into ideal positions (to enable adequate soft
                tissue coverage of the graft).
                                                           Orthodontics          349


• Preparation for alveolar bone grafting in UCLP and BCLP cases may
  involve some or all of the following depending on individual need:
  • palatal expansion;
  • correction of anterior crossbite;
  • tipping of teeth;
  • removal of supernumerary teeth that may compromise soft tissue
     closure.
• BCLP cases are complicated by the position of the premaxilla, which
  may need one or a combination of the following:
  • retraction;
  • intrusion;
  • protrusion;
  • osteotomy at the time of grafting to aid positioning.
• It is important to approximate the premaxilla and lateral alveolar
  segments to facilitate soft tissue closure.
• Postoperatively, orthodontic appliances are left in situ for stability until
  healing of the bone graft has occurred.
Adolescent
•	Therapy is usually accomplished with fixed appliances and treatment
  time is similar to non-​cleft cases.
• Cleft patients, however, pose unique problems, including:
  • missing and malformed teeth especially lateral incisors;
  • unusual dental positions such as canine impactions;
  • arch collapse with crowding;
  • anterior and posterior crossbites;
  • associated skeletal abnormalities;
  • d facial height;
  • maxillary hypoplasia in all three planes of space (AP, vertical and
     transverse).
• Where there is an underlying associated skeletal deformity, the need
  for a combined orthodontic-​orthognathic approach should be discussed
  early on in treatment.
• Attempts should be made to retain the lateral incisor if present.
• If the lateral incisor is missing then a decision needs to be made
  regarding its replacement either by:
  • closing the space and disguising the canine into the lateral incisor;
  • maintaining the space for prosthetic replacement.
• Following completion of orthodontics these patients need to continue
  wearing retainers to maintain the final occlusion.
• Final prosthodontic rehabilitation to replace the missing lateral incisor,
  where indicated, will take place after completion of orthodontic
  treatment.
• If osseointegrated implants are planned then placement should only take
  place after growth is complete, meaning that a period of temporization
  may be necessary if orthodontics is completed early in adolescence.
350



      350    Chapter 7    Cleft lip and palate


            Psychology
            • Children pass through a number of developmental stages during which
              time certain tasks are mastered.
            • Healthy psychosocial adjustment depends on the child’s ability to
              successfully pass through each stage.
            •	This cannot be accomplished alone and depends upon the interaction of
              the child with the systems within which they function including:
              • family;
              • educational;
              • social;
              • medical.
            •	The child is at i risk of psychosocial maladjustment during transitional
              points throughout development.
            • Individuals with CLP have the potential for healthy psychosocial
              adjustment comparable to their peers, but they are at risk of:
              • cognitive;
              • behavioural;
              • emotional;
              • social difficulties.

            The clinical psychologist
            • Raises team members’ awareness of important transitional points.
            • Helps identify individuals at risk of psychosocial maladjustment who may
              benefit from psychological intervention to improve their psychosocial
              well-​being.
            •	The role of the psychologist changes as the child passes through the
              various developmental stages on the way to adulthood.
            Research has shown that adults with repaired CLP at are i risk of psycho-
            social adjustment problems relating to:
            • Psychological well-​being (anxiety and depression).
            • Reduced social contacts.
            • Delays in marriage and having children.
            • Clinical psychology intervention therefore explores:
              • underlying causes of psychosocial maladjustment;
              • promoting self-​acceptance;
              • discussing treatment options in collaboration with the team.
 Chapter 8                               351



Aesthetics
Introduction 352
Non-​surgical aesthetic techniques 354
Surgical techniques 360
Other considerations 374
352



      352    Chapter 8     Aesthetics


            Introduction
            Definition
            Aesthetic surgery can be defined as surgery carried out in an attempt to
            increase an individual’s beauty. The term is used interchangeably with cos-
            metic surgery. It is surgery performed on normal individuals purely to im-
            prove appearance and, as such, implies that there is no functional or direct
            health-​benefit gain. Congenitally normal but unaesthetic features, such as a
            disproportionately large nose, or features that are the result of normal or
            premature ageing may be treated.
            Facial age changes
            All tissues of the face undergo changes with age. These, combined with
            gravity and environmental factors such as sun exposure and smoking, pro-
            duce the characteristic changes in facial shape (the triangle of youth to the
            square of age) together with textural changes with skin and soft tissue:
            • Skin becomes thinner due to degradation of collagen and reduced
              elastin. Static wrinkles form.
            • Muscle tone decreases and bone resorption around the piriform
              aperture results in loss of soft tissue support. As a result, the tip of the
              nose descends and the nose lengthens.
            • Changes in fat distribution, loss in the temporal and infraorbital region
              and deposition submentally, and descent of the fat pads contribute to
              deepening of the nasolabial folds and jowl formation.
            • Occlusal tooth wear leads to a decrease in lower face height due
              to anticlockwise rotation of the mandible. The chin becomes more
              prominent.
            • Dynamic wrinkles due to underlying muscle action become established.
            •	The combined effects of gravity and weakening ligamentous support
              cause descent of facial fat pads and skin.
            • Weakening of the orbital septum allows herniation of orbital fat
              resulting in eye bags. Inferior movement of the malar fat pad lengthens
              the lower eyelid and deepens the nasolabial grooves.
            • Descent of buccal soft tissues leads to the formation of marionette lines
              and jowls over the mandible.
            • Soft tissue laxity in the neck results in the characteristic neck ‘wattle’ and
              loss of the mandibular cervical angle.
            • Bony changes (Lambros’s theory) demonstrate bony changes with a
              clockwise rotation of the midface relative to the cranial base, bone
              deposited supraorbitally, resorption around the piriform region, decent
              of the zygomas laterally, and increase in orbital volume.
                                                        Introduction          353


Patient assessment and patient selection
History
•	A full medical, psychiatric, social, and drug history should be obtained.
• Many patients take low-​dose aspirin prophylactically and often do not
  volunteer this information unless asked. Aspirin significantly increases
  intraoperative bleeding and postoperative morbidity, and should be
  stopped at least 10 days before surgery.
• Smoking significantly decreases skin vascularity and is therefore an
  important consideration in facelift surgery.
• It is vital to determine precisely what concerns the patient, what their
  motivation for seeking surgery is, and to be clear what end result they
  want to achieve. Equally, it is important that the clinician explains to
  the patient in terms that they understand what is realistically possible.
  Unrealistic expectations usually lead to an unhappy patient. Matching
  patient expectation to what can be delivered is one of the challenges
  of aesthetic surgery. If there is any suggestion of the patient being
  psychologically unsuitable for surgery, treatment should be avoided or a
  psychological assessment requested.
Examination
In addition to examining the specific feature that the patient is concerned
about, the general facial morphology should be assessed and documented:
• Skin type and quality, facial proportions and asymmetries, and facial
   nerve function should be recorded.
• Standardized photographic records for record and treatment planning
   purposes are mandatory.
354



      354    Chapter 8        Aesthetics


            Non-​surgical aesthetic techniques
            Botulinum toxin
            Botulinum toxin is a neurotoxic protein produced by the bacterium
            Clostridium botulinum. It is one of the most poisonous naturally occurring
            substances. Although highly toxic, it can be used in minute therapeutic doses
            to treat painful muscle spasms and as a cosmetic treatment to relax muscles
            causing wrinkles. Chemically, there are seven serologically distinct toxin
            types designated A–​G. The toxin is a two-​chain polypeptide with a heavy
            chain linked by a disulphide bond to a light chain. This light chain is an enzyme
            that attacks a protein at the neuromuscular junction, preventing vesicles from
            anchoring to the membrane to release acetylcholine. By inhibiting acetylcho-
            line release at the neuromuscular junction, the toxin interferes with transmis-
            sion of nerve impulses and causes flaccid muscular paralysis.
               Botulinum toxin type A is marketed under the brand names Botox®,
            Vistabel®, Dysport®, and Xeomin®.
               Botox® injection is the most commonly performed cosmetic procedure
            worldwide. In the USA, treatments i by over 3000% between 1997 and
            2003. In 2015, almost 6 million Botox® procedures were carried out.
               Cosmetic use aims to decrease dynamic skin creases by paralysis of the
            underlying muscles, thereby producing a rejuvenating effect on the facial
            skin. Sites and muscles targeted include:
            • Glabella (frown lines) by injection of the procerus and corrugator
               supercilii muscles (Fig. 8.1).
            • Forehead: frontalis.
            •	Periorbital (crow’s feet): orbicularis oculi (Fig. 8.2).
            Less commonly, and more subtly, due to functional considerations:
            • Oral commissures to correct a downturned mouth: depressor anguli oris.
            • Chin: mentalis.
            • Nasolabial folds: levator labii alaeque nasi.
            • Lips: orbicularis oris.
            • Neck bands: platysma.
            • Décolletage: platysma.
            • ‘Gummy smile’: to upper lip at base of nose.




            Fig. 8. Injection sites for glabellar lines.
                                  Non-surgical aesthetic techniques             355




Fig. 8.2 Injection sites for crow’s feet.

Practical considerations
•	Use of topical anaesthesia and a fine gauge needle (30G, yellow)
  decreases patient discomfort. Use a 1mL syringe.
• 3 units of Dysport® are equivalent to 1 unit of Botox® or Vistabel®.
  Dysport® has a quicker onset and diffuses more than Botox®—​efficacy
  is equivalent. Each injection can diffuse 2–​3cm radially.
• May take up to 7–​14 days to have its effect.
• Length of action is 4–​6 months.
• Dilute 100 or 50 units Botox® into saline for injection.
• 100 units in 5mL gives 2 units in 0.1mL; 100 units in 2mL gives 5 units
  in 0.1mL. Use small volumes and doses at each site—​the greater the
  dilution, the greater the diffusion.
• Common doses are:
  • glabella 5–​8 units in 5 sites;
  • forehead 3–​6 units in 6–​10 sites (stay medially to preserve eyebrow
     arching). Two rows may be needed in a high forehead.
•	To avoid extraocular muscle compromise—​inject well away from
  orbital rim.
•	Avoid total paralysis of the forehead as it produces an unnatural
  appearance. It is better to top it up later than overdo it initially.
•	The lateral eyebrow can be arched to produce an aesthetically pleasing
  result by preserving function in the lateral frontalis and treating
  orbicularis oculi lateral to the orbit. Paralysis of the lateral part of
  frontalis causes loss of arching and resulting ‘angry appearance’.
•	Use of Botox® in the treatment of nasolabial grooves is best combined
  with a filler. Injection of the levator labii alaeque nasi causes depressed
  upper lip elevation and can therefore be utilized in the treatment of the
  gummy smile.
• Neck bands can be treated effectively by injecting 3–​5 units at 1–​1.5cm
  intervals.
356



      356    Chapter 8     Aesthetics

            Complications
            In the hands of experienced clinicians, complications following Botox® for
            cosmetic reasons should be rare. Reported complications include:
            •	Extraocular muscle paralysis resulting in strabismus and diplopia. This
               normally corrects after ~6 weeks.
            •	Ptosis of the upper eyelid and brow.
            •	Asymmetrical muscle paralysis.
            • Bruising.
            •	Haematoma.
            Contraindications
            Botulinum toxin should be avoided in patients suffering from neuropathic/​
            neurological disorders. Injection into an infected site should be avoided.
            Fillers
            Dermal fillers are injectable substances used to augment the skin. They are
            used in the cosmetic treatment of static and dynamic wrinkles, as well as
            deep grooves such as nasolabial folds and marionette lines. They are also
            used in the treatment of depressed scars. Lips can be augmented with cer-
            tain fillers.
               For many years, the most commonly used agent was collagen. The major
            drawback with collagen is the possibility of allergy. Skin testing is therefore
            required prior to treatment. The most commonly used fillers in use at the
            present include the following:
            •	Restylane® and Perlane® are both made from hyaluronic acid, a natural
               carbohydrate polymer found in the ground substance of connective
               tissue. They last up to 6 months.
            •	Hylaform® is also a hyaluronate-​based filler.
            • Sculptra® is polylactic acid that stimulates production of autogenous
               collagen. The effect is therefore delayed and several treatments are
               often required to achieve the desired result. It lasts 18–​24 months and
               is used extensively to treat facial lipoatrophy in AIDS patients. It is
               described as a volumizer rather than a filler.
            •	Radiesse® is a combination of calcium hydroxyapatite microspheres
               in a polysaccharide gel. It lasts about 2 years and stimulates collagen
               formation.
            •	Evolence® is a porcine collagen derivative with good handling properties
               and effects that can last more than 1 year.
            •	Artifill® is made of synthetic microspheres suspended in a bovine
               collagen gel. Its effects are claimed to be permanent.
            Fillers are injected intradermally or subcutaneously in order to plump out
            the overlying soft tissues and smooth out wrinkles. Injection technique is
            key to achieving good results—​along the length of fine lines (linear threading
            technique) or injected in a fan-​shaped manner from several directions to fill
            deeper grooves. Even injection is required to avoid subcutaneous lumps.
            Injection sites should be massaged to encourage even distribution.
            Complications
            All injections can cause haematoma formation and infection. Uneven in-
            jection can lead to subcutaneous lumps that may be visible as well as palp-
            able. Injection into a vessel can cause blindness and ischaemic loss of tissue.
                             Non-surgical aesthetic techniques                  357


Allergy can occur with all fillers and can be immediate or delayed, causing
granuloma formation. Very serious infections can be caused by permanent
fillers when biofilms coat the inert particles, which are transported by
macrophages to the lymphatics, resulting in obstruction to the lymphatic
drainage and further infection.
Resurfacing techniques
•   Dermabrasion.
•   Microdermabrasion.
•   Laser resurfacing.
•   Chemical peels.
Dermabrasion
• Involves the use of a rotary hand engine with a diamond wheel or wire
  brush to abrade the skin.
• Is usually carried out under LA or topical anaesthesia and is used for the
  treatment of age changes, scarring, or photodamage.
• Is commonly used to treat acne scarring, naevi, chloasma, and facial
  wrinkles.
• In skilled hands it is an extremely effective technique.
• Its main advantage is that the depth of injury can be directly controlled:
  • superficial dermabrasion is sufficient to treat fine wrinkles;
  • deeper treatment into the papillary or reticular dermis may be
     necessary in the treatment of deep scarring.
• Contraindications include keloid or hypertrophic scar formation, and a
  history of herpes simplex infections.
• Complications include keloid or hypertrophic scarring, hyper or
  hypopigmentation, infections, persistent erythema, and oedema. Full-​
  thickness injury to the skin results in healing by secondary intention and
  consequent scarring.
Microdermabrasion
This non-​invasive technique involves the use of aluminium oxide particles
to ‘sandblast’ the skin. This removes the superficial skin layer and produces
mild oedema resulting in temporary reduction in fine wrinkles. It may have a
rejuvenating effect by stimulating new collagen formation.
Laser resurfacing
Laser resurfacing using a CO2 or erbium laser is used for similar indications
to chemical peels and dermabrasion. Thermal injury to the skin results in
removal of surface layers, contraction of collagen, and new rejuvenated col-
lagen formation. The depth of injury produced is controllable with less risk
of inadvertent over-​treatment than with a chemical peel. It is particularly
effective in the treatment of fine, non-​dynamic lines and changes produced
by photo-​ageing. Erythematous scars can be improved and stepped scars
may be treated by ‘shoulder resurfacing’.
   CO2 treatment to the eyelids to produce skin contraction can be com-
bined with transconjunctival orbital fat removal in cosmetic blepharoplasty.
   Other lasers producing light of different wavelengths target various
chromopores within the skin and are therefore used to treat varying con-
ditions (Table 8.1).
358



      358    Chapter 8        Aesthetics


             Table 8. Lasers producing light of different wavelengths and their targets
             Laser                      Wave length (nm)            Skin chromophore
             Argon                      193                         Melanin, blood
             KTP                        532                         Melanin, blood
             Krypton                    531.7–​647                  Melanin, blood
             Copper vapour              511                         Melanin, blood
             Dye laser                  585                         Melanin, blood
             Ruby                       694.7                       Melanin
             Alexandrite                755                         Melanin
             Nd:Yag                     1064                        Melanin, blood
             Holmium:Yag                2100                        Water
             Erbium:Yag                 2940                        Water
             Carbon dioxide             10,600                      Water


               Depending on the characteristics of the laser used, pigmented lesions
            including tattoos and vascular lesions may be treated.
            • Laser safety: operating room personnel and patients should be
               protected from inadvertent ocular injury and the ETT from damage. The
               presence of bacterial and viral DNA has been demonstrated in the CO2
               laser plume. Special masks that filter such partials have been developed
               and should be worn.
            • Complications include:
               • ocular damage;
               • full-​thickness burn;
               • ectropion following laser blepharoplasty;
               • prolonged erythema;
               • milia;
               • skin irritation;
               • herpes simplex reactivation;
               • bacterial and fungal infections;
               • hyperpigmentation;
               • hypopigmentation;
               • hypertrophic scarring.

            Chemical peels
            A chemical peel is the application of a chemical agent that causes controlled
            destruction of the superficial layers of the skin. The superficial damage to
            the skin causes exfoliation and wound healing.
            • Peels reduce:
              • fine wrinkles;
              • acne and other scars;
              • pigmentation abnormalities;
              • actinic keratoses;
              • lentigines (solar-​induced freckles).
                            Non-surgical aesthetic techniques                 359


• Common agents:
   • glycolic acid;
   • trichloroacetic acid (TCA);
   •	TCA with blue glycerine (a blue peel);
   • phenol (carbolic acid).

The effect is modulated by the strength of the solution used and the
number of applications, which are determined by the lesion being treated
and the skin type of the patient. Care must be taken when treating the eye-
lids where the skin is thinnest.
• Complications:
   • more likely with deeper peels and when using phenol;
   • hyperpigmentation;
   • persistent erythema;
   • reactivation of herpes simplex infection;
   • hypertrophic scarring.
360



      360    Chapter 8       Aesthetics


            Surgical techniques
            Blepharoplasty
            This is a procedure used to shape or modify the appearance of the eyelids.
            The word was first used by Von Graefe in 1818 to describe a procedure for
            repairing defects in the eyelids secondary to tumour excision.
              The eyelids are one of the first structures of the face to develop per-
            manent structural changes due to ageing.
            • Changes in elasticity of:
              • orbital septum;
              • tarsus;
              • orbicularis muscle;
            •	Result in:
              • excess skin;
              • wrinkles;
              • pseudoherniation of orbital fat;
              • baggy, tired looking eyes.

            Blepharoplasty will not on its own treat malar bags or the tear-​trough
            deformity.
            Aesthetic goals
            The perceived aesthetic ideals of the Caucasian eye are shown in Fig. 8.3. It
            is important to recognize the racial variations.
            Assessment/​history
            As with all aesthetic patients:
            • What does the patient perceive to be the problem?
            • What are their expectations?
            • Why do they want the surgery?

                                                            Well positioned
                                                            male eyebrow
               Supratarsal fold,
               no excess skin

                                                                              Almond shaped
                                                                              aperture with
                                                                              intercanthal axis
              Medial canthus                                                  sloping upwards
              slightly lower                                                  from medial to
              than the lateral                                                lateral
              canthus

                      Naso-jugal line                  Lower eyelid
                      barely
                                                       of iris when
                                                       looking ahead

            Fig. 8.3 Perceived aesthetic ideals of the Caucasian eye.
                                                  Surgical techniques             361


•	Previous surgery.
• Dry eyes.
• Contact lenses.
• Diplopia.
The following areas should be assessed:
•	Position of the eyebrow (sometimes a brow-​lift is required).
•	Amount of redundant skin.
• Symmetry, position, and relative excess of the fat pads.
•	Ability to close the eyes easily.
•	Position of the eyelids relative to the eyes.
Specific tests
• Snap test: examination for lower eyelid laxity. The lower eyelid is pulled
  down gently—​it should snap back within 1 second. With low elasticity
  this may only happen on blinking.
• Distraction test: is positive if the lower lid can be pulled down >7mm
  from the globe (indicates laxity of the lower lid). In these patients,
  blepharoplasty without a lower lid tightening procedure may lead to
  ectropion and scleral show (the appearance of sclera below the iris
  when the patient looks ahead).
• Examine for compensated brow ptosis: look for descent of the
  eyebrows when the eye closes. This demonstrates that the brow is
  ptotic. In these patients, frontalis activity keeps the eyebrows elevated
  when the eyes are open. This indicates that a brow lift may be required.
  Blepharoplasty in such patients may result in a worsening of their
  appearance.
• Location of site of herniation of fat pads: gently press on the globes and
  observe the areas of fat prolapse.
• Presence of Bell’s phenomenon: usually on eyelid closure the globes
  rotate upwards and the cornea is protected. If absent there is risk of
  damage to corneas after blepharoplasty.
• Ophthalmology assessment:
  • should include visual fields and acuity;
  • if the patient has symptoms or signs of dry eyes then a Schirmer test
     is indicated;
  • take good, standardized photographs.

Techniques of blepharoplasty
Upper
The eyelids are marked with the patient sitting upright. The lower incision is
marked so as to place the surgical scar within the supratarsal fold. The sur-
geon then pinches the excess tissue with blunt forceps until the lids separate
slightly. This continues across the eyelid. Care is taken not to extend too far
medially or laterally, as these areas produce visible scars. A strip of tissue
including skin and orbicularis muscle is excised. If protruding fat needs to be
excised from the medial and lateral upper fat pads this is achieved through
small stab incision in the orbital septum. Beware a herniating lacrimal gland
and the levator aponeurosis. Meticulous haemostasis is essential.
362



      362    Chapter 8      Aesthetics

            Lower
            Great care must be taken with lower blepharoplasty as it is easy to excise
            excess tissue and in so doing produce an ectropion or scleral show. The
            incision is made just below the lower lash line (subciliary). Either a skin only,
            or skin and muscle flap is raised. With the mouth open (puts tension on the
            lower lid) the flap is elevated and the excess tissue marked and removed.
            The excised tissue is triangular in shape, with the maximal vertical dimension
            beneath the lateral canthus. Fat removal, if required from the three com-
            partments, is achieved by small incisions through the orbital septum. Care
            should be taken to ensure excess fat is not removed as this can cause an
            undesirable sunken appearance.
            • Lower lid transconjunctival blepharoplasty—​this technique enables
               fat from the three fat pads to be removed via an incision on the inside
               of the lower eyelid thus avoiding any external scars. However, excess
               eyelid skin and orbicularis muscle cannot be removed.
            • Fat preservation techniques—​the grooves between the lower
               eyelid and the cheek skin are known as the tear-​trough deformities.
               Correction of this defect can be achieved by transposition of orbital fat
               into the area (Loeb’s/​Hamra’s technique) or placement of a Flower’s
               tear-​trough implant.
            • Augmentation of the infraorbital rim with implants (preformed or
               custom made) can address infraorbital hollowing.
            Other techniques involve tightening of the stretched orbital septum, which
            replaces the orbital fat within the orbit.
            Upper-​eyelid fold reconstruction
            This technique involves suturing the superficial layers of the eyelid to the
            deeper structures thus reconstructing the supratarsal fold.
            Lateral canthopexy
            Repositioning of the lateral canthus superiorly can improve lower eyelid
            position and reduce the possible complications of scleral show with lower
            lid blepharoplasties. Wedge resections of the lower eyelid may be neces-
            sary with very lax lower eyelids.
            Complications of blepharoplasty
            • Ocular damage.
            • Corneal abrasion and ulceration can occur. Prevention by meticulous
              protection of the eye is important.
            • Dry eyes: this is common in the immediate postoperative period and
              is due to oedema. A good preoperative history is important to identify
              patients with a pre-​existing history of dry eyes. Patients with persistent
              dry eyes should be referred to an ophthalmologist and prescribed
              artificial tears.
            • Haematoma: meticulous haemostasis is essential during the procedure. If
              recognized in the immediate postoperative period, it should be evacuated.
            • Loss of eyelashes: caused by diathermy or incision too close to the hair
              follicles.
            • Lower eyelid complications, e.g. ectropion leading to epiphora.
            • Scleral show: the lower lid should cover ~1mm of the limbus when the
              patient looks directly ahead.
                                                   Surgical techniques              363


• Diplopia: usually temporary following fat repositioning techniques due
  to the change in orbital volume. Can be due to damage to the inferior
  oblique muscle situated just within the margin of the bony orbit lying
  between the medial and middle fat compartments. Leads to double
  vision looking up and laterally.
• Blindness—​this is the most devastating complication:
  • risk as reported by DeMere is ~0.04%;
  • the usual cause is retrobulbar haemorrhage within the immediate
     postoperative period;
  • it is essential to inform the patients of this risk and tell them to return
     if any severe pain occurs behind the eye, the eye becomes proptosed,
     or the visual acuity reduced;
  • emergency treatment is by lateral canthotomy and cantholysis, and
     then surgical decompression (see % Initial management of ocular
     injuries, p. 14).
• Other complications such as infection are possible, but rare due to the
  excellent blood supply to the area.
• Asymmetry: caused by over-​resection of skin or fat.
Brow lift
• Consideration of the position of the brow is essential when assessing a
  patient who is requesting a blepharoplasty.
• If the brow position is too low, then an upper blepharoplasty will make
  the aperture smaller and the patient will look worse.
• Surgical brow lifting can be performed either with open or closed
  (endoscopic) techniques.
• Minor elevation of the brow can be achieved with botulinum toxin when
  injected into the depressors (corrugator, procerus, and the superior
  lateral part of orbicularis oculis).
•	An attractive brow should angle upwards in its medial half and drop
  down slightly or remain horizontal for the rest of the lateral brow. The
  female brow arches more and is slightly higher laterally compared with
  the male brow. The brow skin is thicker than the eyelid skin and it is
  important that this thicker skin should not occupy the normal position
  of the thinner eyelid, otherwise the patient will appear tired or cross.
•	There is no agreed measurement to diagnose brow ptosis. Patients
  should bring photographs of themselves when younger to compare
  eyebrow level. However, a useful measurement is the distance between
  the inferior limbus of the cornea to the centre of the brow. If this is
  <22mm there is likely to be brow ptosis.
Techniques
• Direct brow lift: this is the oldest and simplest technique. There is little
  risk of damage to the facial nerve. It is suitable for patients with mild
  ptosis and bushy eyebrows. However, it leaves a visible scar above the
  eyebrows (Fig. 8.4).
• Mid-​forehead brow lift: the incision line should be within a prominent
  horizontal skin crease. Transverse incisions are made in the galea centrally to
  avoid damaging the supraorbital nerves. Procerus and corrugator are divided.
  The galea is shortened as much as is required and the excess cutaneous
  tissue excised. Careful repair in layers is essential to avoid scarring.
364



      364    Chapter 8       Aesthetics

             Coronal incision,                                  Midbrow incision.
             lies within the                                    Satisfactory scar
             hairline. It achieves                              only if hidden in
             a good brow lift                                   deep horizontal
             without visible                                    folds. Provides
             scars                                              moderate lift

                                                                   Direct brow lift.
                                                                   Only cosmetically
                                                                   acceptable if patient
                                                                   has prominent
                                                                   eyebrows. Poor lift
                                                                   compared to other
                                                                   techniques



            Fig. 8.4 Access for brow lift.

            • Coronal forehead lift: traditionally open but now almost exclusively
              endoscopic (Fig. 8.4).
            • Endoscopic brow lift:
              • this technique uses 3–​5 incisions placed within the hairy scalp
                anteriorly and laterally;
              • dissection centrally is in a subperiosteal plane, but lateral to
                the anterior temporal line the dissection should be below the
                temporoparietal fascia on the surface of the deep temporal fascia;
              • dissection continues over the lateral orbital walls and to the superior
                orbital rim;
              • supraorbital and supratrochlear nerves are identified and protected;
              • an up-​cutting periosteal elevator is used to divide the pericranium
                horizontally at a number of levels;
              • centrally over the glabella region the pericranium is divided and the
                corrugator supercilii and procerus exposed;
              • the brow is then lifted and suspended using a number of different
                techniques, e.g. screws, clips, or resorbable implants.
             		The endoscopic brow lift produces less loss of hair, paraesthesia,
                and scarring than coronal techniques. The procedure should not be
                used in patients with high hairlines as, after surgery, the hairline will
                be higher. In patients with high hair line and brow ptosis, a coronal
                approach at the hairline is indicated.
            • Complications of brow lifts: include infection, haematoma, neurological
              damage, brow asymmetry, lagophthalmos (inability to close eyes) and
              hair loss.
            Otoplasty
            This is the surgical technique designed to correct congenitally prominent
            ears. Cosmetic otoplasty was first performed in 1881 (Fig. 8.5).
              The auricle is a fibroelastic cartilage structure medially covered by
            connective tissue and skin. The arterial supply is from the posterior
                                                          Surgical techniques      365


                   Inferior crus       Triangular fossa         Superior crus

   Root of helix                                                  Helical rim


                                                                  Scaphoid fossa
External auditory
meatus

           Tragus
                                                                   Antihelix



 Intertragal notch                                               Condral fossa




                      Lobule

Fig. 8.5 Surface anatomy of the ear.

auricular and superficial temporal arteries. Sensory innervation is from the
auriculotemporal (V3) and great auricular (C3) nerves, Arnold’s nerve (X),
and branches from the facial nerve.
   The auricle is fully formed at birth. It reaches 85% of its final size by the
age of 3 years and is virtually adult size by 6 years. Elongation of the lobule
in the older patient gives the appearance of continued ear growth.
Aetiology of the prominent ear
•	Excessively deep concha.
• Failure of an anti-​helical fold to develop.
•	A combination of these.
Other ear abnormalities include the ‘constricted’ ear, cryptotia (root of the
helix is buried in the temporal skin), cup ear, shell ear, Stahl’s ear, bat ear,
Machiavellian ear, and lop ear.
Assessment
A full medical history is essential, including history of poor scars and keloid
formation, together with assessment of the patient’s expectations, physical
examination, and photographic records.
Timing of surgery
Ideally before the child becomes self-​
                                      conscious of the problem (age
5–​6 years).
Techniques
Techniques fall into either cartilage cutting or cartilage sparing.
Methods for correcting a deep concha
• Suturing: the concha is sutured down to the underlying mastoid fascia
  with mattress sutures.
36



     366    Chapter 8       Aesthetics

           • Cartilage excision: the concha is reduced in height by removing a full
             thickness crescent of cartilage from the conchal cup.
           • Cartilage scoring technique: the anterior surface of the rim of the
             conchal cup reduces the conchal prominence.
           Methods to reduce the anti-​helical fold
           • Suturing technique: Mustarde introduced a technique whereby sutures are
             placed from the scaphoid fossa to the concha to develop a new anti-​helical
             fold. It has the advantage that, with no incisions, the anti-​helical fold is smooth.
           • Cartilage scoring technique: a number of different techniques have
             been developed to score partially through the anterior surface of the
             cartilage in the region of where the anti-​helical fold should be. Relies on
             the physical properties of the cartilage, such that any physical alteration
             (incising or scoring) will cause the cartilage to deform away from the
             incised surface (Gibson principle). A tunnel is created between the skin
             and cartilage anteriorly. The cartilage is either abraded or scored (a
             simple and effective technique involves bending the tip of a 22G needle
             to right angles and using this to score the cartilage).
           • Posterior anti-​helical fold weakening: this technique weakens the
             posterior aspect of the anti-​helical fold so that, when combined with
             suturing techniques, it will allow the cartilage to bend.
           • Incisional techniques: Luckett described a technique whereby a single
             incision through the anti-​helical line allows the fold to be created. The
             technique creates an unnatural sharp line (a pair of parallel incisions
             produces a more rounded appearance of the fold).
           Postoperative care
           •	The ears should be dressed carefully. Jelonet® and cotton wool in proflavine
             allows gentle packing to maintain shape and support the healing cartilage.
           •	The ear is then covered anteriorly and posteriorly with gauze and
             cotton wool, and a light head bandage applied.
           • It is essential that any complaints of pain be treated seriously.
             Haematoma beneath the skin can result in necrosis of the cartilage and
             distortion of the ear, as can too tight a bandage.
           •	The dressing is usually taken down on the first postoperative day and
             checked for any haematoma. The patient then has the head band
             replaced for a further week or wears a light sports band at night for a
             further 6 weeks.
           Complications
           •	Haematoma.
           • Loss of cartilage and resultant deformity.
           •	Asymmetry.
           • Over and under-​correction.
           • Keloid scars.
           • Infection.
           Facelift (rhytidectomy)
           The effect of ageing and gravity on the face affects the skin and the deep
           structures leading to:
           • Brow ptosis.
           •	Prominent nasolabial grooves.
                                                    Surgical techniques              367


• Marionette lines.
•	Hollowing in the infraorbital regions.
• Jowls.
• Loose submental skin.
• Less elastic skin.
• Wrinkles.
Assessment of the patient
This involves a thorough past medical history and psychological profile.
Any predisposing factors for infection or haematoma formation must be
identified. Smoking should stop and aspirin should be discontinued at least
10 days prior to surgery.
Facelift anatomy
The facelift anatomy consists of a number of layers:
• Skin.
• Subcutaneous fat.
• Superficial musculo-​aponeurotic system (SMAS).
• Muscles of facial expression.
•	Thin layer of fascia.
• Facial nerve.
SMAS
•	A layer of fascia continuous with the frontalis muscle, galea
  aponeurotica, temporoparietal fascia and platysma muscle.
• Is tightly bound to the zygoma.
• Is less distinct anteriorly at the level of the nasolabial fold.
• Sensory nerves lie superficial to the SMAS and most of the branches of
  the facial nerve lie deep to it.
There are a number of ligaments that secure the superficial structures to
the bone (the retaining ligaments of the face):
• Osseocutaneous ligaments: i.e. over the zygoma (McGregor’s patch)
  and anterior part of the mandible.
• Musculocutaneous ligaments: these are thickenings of the fascia
  between the muscle and the skin. They occur at the parotid and
  masseter.
Malar fat pad
This is a structure below the skin (second layer of the face). It is superfi-
cial to the SMAS. Different techniques have been described to elevate this
structure, usually with the skin dissection to allow repositioning of the fat
pad cranially.
Platysma
This is part of the SMAS/​muscle layer in the cervical area. The medial
aspects of the muscle become stretched with age, giving the appearance
of bands in the neck. Special treatment of the platysma is often necessary.
Nerves
The frontal branch of the facial nerve can be at risk during the facelift. It lies
in the temporoparietal fascia and runs along Pitanguy’s line (0.5cm below
the tragus to 1.5cm above the eye brow laterally). The great auricular nerve
368



      368    Chapter 8     Aesthetics

            that supplies sensation to the ear is susceptible to damage where it crosses
            the sternocleidomastoid muscle (Erb’s point is where it crosses the pos-
            terior border).
            Skin-​only facelift
            In this technique, the skin is undermined and any excess removed. It has
            the highest relapse rate and can look somewhat unnatural. Access is via
            preauricular (tragal) incisions with temporal and postauricular extensions
            (hidden in the hair line).
            SMAS/​platysma facelift
            •	Access: as for skin-​only facelift.
            • Skin is undermined as far forward as the nasolabial fold and then the
              SMAS layer is elevated.
            •	The dissection layer must be changed when the zygomaticus muscle
              is reached, so that the dissection is superficial to the muscle to avoid
              damaging branches of the facial nerve.
            •	The SMAS can be tightened and the excess excised or plicated (and
              used to augment the zygoma).
            •	As the platysma and the SMAS are continuous, tightening the SMAS in a
              cephalad direction will also elevate the platysma.
            •	The changes in the cervical region depend on the structure of the bony
              mandible, position of the hyoid bone, anatomy of the muscles, and
              quantity of adipose tissue.
            •	The skin is draped over the tightened SMAS, analogous to clothes over
              a tight corset.
            •	Additional procedures on the platysma include platysmal plication
              medially, excision of part of the muscle, and resuturing. This gives a
              more enduring and natural appearance.
            Mask/​subperiosteal facelift
            • Coronal and intraoral incisions.
            • Dissection is subperiosteally over the forehead, then deep to the
              superficial layer of the deep temporal fascia, within the fat pad to reach
              the zygomatic bone.
            •	Attachments to the zygoma are released.
            • Intraorally, dissection proceeds subperiosteally over the midface.
            • Soft tissues are suspended.
            •	Technique allows changes to be made to the skeletal base, e.g. widening
              of the orbital aperture, reduction of the heavy supraorbital bone and
              augmentation of the malar region.
            •	Allows radical changes to the face, but recovery time is longer (several
              months).
            Minimal-​access cranial suspension (MACS lift)
            • Benefits from shorted scar.
            • SMAS suspended with non-​absorbable sutures.
            • Can be compared with the ‘S’ lift (mini facelift).
            • Benefits from reduced recovery time.
            Endoscopic facelift
            The face can be dissected subperiosteally using a number of small incisions.
            This technique is indicated where there is little redundant skin.
                                                  Surgical techniques              369


Complications of facelifts
•	Haematoma and secondary skin necrosis.
• Neurological injury (particularly the facial and greater auricular nerves).
• Loss of hair.
• Infection.
• Changes in skin pigmentation.
•	Asymmetry.
•	Pixie ears.
•	Hypertrophic scars.
Liposuction
This is a technique for aspirating subcutaneous fat. Fat may be either in:
• Superficial compartments: contains many fibrous strands that are
   responsible for the skin dimpling in ‘cellulite’.
• Deep compartments: fat in the deeper layers is less compact.
• Compartments are divided by the superficial fascia.
Once fat cells have been removed they cannot be replaced. However, the
remaining ones can hypertrophy. Liposuction in the maxillofacial region is
usually confined to the submental/​cervical region, or is used to aspirate fat
from the umbilical regions or inner aspect of the knee to augment other
areas within the face.
Dry liposuction
This is a historical technique. Fat is aspirated without prior infiltration of
tumescent solution. This method was associated with high blood loss. It has
no place in the head and neck region.
Wet liposuction
Tumescent solution (Hartman’s solution with added adrenaline, hyalase,
LA, and steroids) aids liposuction and reduces haemorrhage infiltrated prior
to the liposuction. The fat is aspirated using one of the many cannulae avail-
able. It is important that when aspirating the fat, the tip of the cannula stops
short of the skin as otherwise dimpling can occur.
Complications
• Damage to other structures.
•	Paraesthesia.
•	Haemorrhage.
• Infection.
• Contour irregularities.
Colman fat technique
• Described by Colman.
• Fat is aspirated, centrifuged, and serum removed.
•	Purified fat re-​injected using small cannulae and multiple passes through
  the tissues at different levels.
• It is reported that, using this technique, the fat cells remain viable and
  resorption of the fat is low.
Implants
In facial cosmetic surgical practice, implant materials can be used to aug-
ment various anatomical sites. The most common sites are the nose, cheek-
bones, and chin.
370



      370    Chapter 8     Aesthetics

              The ideal implant material is:
            • Inexpensive.
            • Biocompatible.
            • Inert.
            • Free from the risk of transmitted infection.
            • Dimensionally stable.
            •	Easily available avoiding a second surgical donor site.
            Implant materials can be classified as:
            •	Autogenous grafts (from the same individual).
            •	Homografts (from the same species).
            •	Allografts (same species, non-​identical).
            • Isografts (same species, genetically identical).
            • Xenograft (different species).
            •	Alloplast (implanted inorganic material).
            •	Autogenous implant materials include bone, cartilage, fat, and
              dermatofat grafts.
            •	Homografts and xenografts (bovine or porcine) include cadaveric
              lyophilized bone and cartilage.
            Autogenous grafts
            Bone and cartilage grafts are used to fill contour defects on the facial skel-
            eton or for augmentation of normal structures. The nasal dorsum is com-
            monly grafted with autogenous calvarial bone. All bone grafts are subject to
            resorption to a greater or lesser extent and, therefore, cannot be regarded
            as structurally stable. There is a common misconception that bone, which
            ossifies intramembranously (e.g. calvarial), resorbs less than that which has
            an endochondral origin.
               Cartilage is more dimensionally stable than bone. It may be harvested
            from the ear (conchal cartilage) or nasal septum. Larger amounts may be
            taken from the costal cartilages.
            Alloplastic implants
            • Pre-​formed alloplastic implants: Medpor® (polyethylene), Proplast®, or
               silicone. Available in various sizes. Used extensively to augment:
               • chin;
               • mandibular angles;
               • zygomas;
               • fixed in position by screw fixation to the underlying bone.
            • Custom-​made titanium implants: can be used at various sites including
               calvarium, infraorbital rim, zygoma, and mandible. A 3D CT scan is required,
               from which appropriate software allows a model to be milled by CAD/​
               CAM technology or produced by stereolithography. An implant can be
               made as the mirror image of the normal side. PEEK (polyetheretherketone)
               is a relatively new, non-​porous, rigid material that can be printed bases on
               3D scan reconstruction and virtual surgery. It has a low infection rate.
            Rhinoplasty
            Definitions
            Rhinoplasty describes a range of surgical procedures that may be used to
            reshape the nose:
            • Primary rhinoplasty: operation on a nose that has not had previous surgery.
                                                 Surgical techniques             371


• Secondary or revision rhinoplasty: surgery on a nose that has had one or
  more previous operations that have not produced the desired change.
• Aesthetic or cosmetic rhinoplasty: aimed at improving the appearance
  of the nose.
• Functional rhinoplasty: surgery aimed at relieving nasal obstruction.
  •	Aesthetic and functional rhinoplasties are frequently combined.
• Closed rhinoplasty: access to the nasal bones and cartilages is via
  incisions within the nose.
• Open rhinoplasty involves a transcolumellar incision, which is then
  extended along the vestibular surface of the columella to expose the
  lower lateral cartilages.
Anatomy
•	The vault of the nose is formed by the nasal bones, the upper lateral
  cartilages, and the lower lateral cartilages (from above downwards).
•	The lower lateral cartilages have medial and lateral crura.
•	The nasal bones join the frontal bones at the radix and the nasal tip is
  attached to the upper lip by the columella.
•	The nasal septum is made up of the septal cartilage, nasal crest of the
  maxilla, vomer, and perpendicular plate of the ethmoid bone.
•	The skin lined entrance to the nose is called the vestibule. Hair growing
  in the vestibule is the vibrissae and the part of the vestibule immediately
  beneath the tip is the dome.
Planning
A thorough history and examination is required to ascertain precisely what
result the patient wishes. Unrealistic expectations should be addressed at
this stage and the achievable result discussed frankly. Computer programs
that allow postoperative result prediction should be used with caution.
Photographic records are essential.
   While some surgeons carry out analysis of facial morphology, measuring
frontonasal, nasolabial angles, and the angular relationship of the nose to
other facial features, most rely on clinical assessment alone.
Closed rhinoplasty access
•	An inter-​cartilaginous incision is made though the membrane between
  the upper and lower lateral cartilages.
• If joined to a cruciate incision through the membranous septum, access
  to the dorsum of the nose and caudal septum is achieved.
•	A cartilage splitting incision achieves similar access and can be used
  when resection of the lower lateral cartilage is required.
•	A rim incision is an incision along the inferior border of the lower lateral
  cartilage. If combined with an inter-​cartilaginous incision, the lower
  lateral cartilage can be dissected and exteriorized to allow resection
  under direct vision.
• Bony osteotomies can be carried out either via the closed approach or
  with the aid of transcutaneous stab incisions.
Open rhinoplasty access
•	Allows superior access to the nasal tip and is used when complicated
  adjustments to the nasal tip are required, e.g. in treatment of the cleft
  nose deformity.
372



      372    Chapter 8     Aesthetics

            •	The nasal tip may be refined by resection of the cephalic border of the
              lower lateral cartilages and can be narrowed by approximation of the
              lower lateral cartilages.
            The many techniques described for rhinoplasty, which can be used alone
            or in combination, allow both radical and subtle changes in shape to be
            achieved.
            Reduction rhinoplasty
            •	Usually involves resection of the dorsum of the nose to reduce a nasal
              hump. This produces an ‘open-​roof deformity’, which is then corrected
              by lateral nasal osteotomies and in-​fracture of the nasal bones.
            •	The nose can be narrowed by rasping or in-​fracture.
            Augmentation rhinoplasty
            •	Augmentation of the nasal dorsum involves placement of a graft to
              increase projection.
            •	Augmentation materials include:
              • autogenous/​lyophilized (dried by freezing in a high vacuum) cartilage
                 or bone;
              • alloplastic material, such as Medpore®.
            • Spreader grafts between the septum and upper lateral cartilages widen
              the nose.
            Rhinoplasty can be carried out with either LA (± sedation) or GA. Nasal
            splints placed during nasal bone fracture remain in place for 1 week.
            Recovery time to allow bruising to resolve is usually 2 weeks.
            Complications
            • Bleeding.
            • Infection.
            • Distorted sense of smell.
            • Sinusitis.
            • Septal perforation.
            • Sensory disturbance (nose or upper anterior teeth).
            • In the long term, changes due to scarring may distort the nose
              necessitating revision.
            Cheiloplasty
            • Cheiloplasty is the technical term for surgery that changes the size or
              shape of the lip.
            • Lip reduction: the process of surgically reducing the size of the lip
              or lips in order to reduce the appearance of abnormally large or
              protruding lips.
            • Lip enhancement for those who wish to make their lips larger.
            Lip reduction
            Lip size varies between individuals, although there are general trends in size
            within ethnic groups. Abnormally large or protuberant lips can be congenital
            (e.g. the double lip deformity) or acquired (e.g. orofacial granulomatosis).
            Lip reduction surgery involves excision of an ellipse of mucosa, submucosa,
            and occasionally orbicularis oris muscle, extending from oral commissure to
                                                 Surgical techniques            373


oral commissure. The anterior aspect of the incision is placed posterior to
the lip seal and wet line so the scar is hidden.
Lip enhancement
Can be achieved using various materials:
•	An injectable filler such as Restylane® (allows enhancement of the white
   roll of the lip and philtrum, as well as augmentation of the vermillion
   portion of the lip).
• More permanent results can be achieved using autogenous fascial grafts
   or an alloplastic material such as Gortex®.
Lip lift
The normal lip length is 20–​22mm in a young adult ♀ and 22–​24mm in a
young adult ♂. Tooth show at rest is normally 2–​4 mm with minimal gin-
gival show on a full smile. Tooth show can be affected by the height of the
maxilla, proclination, and length of the teeth. Surgery by removing 6–​10 mm
to elevate the lip can achieve an aesthetic tooth show, improve vermillion by
everting the lip and reducing the lip length:
   Complications include asymmetry, distortion of the columella of the
nose, scaring and asymmetry. Under and over resection are also possible
   See Fig. 8.6.




Fig. 8.6 Lip lift.
374



      374    Chapter 8     Aesthetics


            Other considerations
            Medicolegal matters
            Cosmetic surgical practice is potentially a medicolegal minefield. Patients
            may have unrealistic expectations regarding outcomes. Narcissistic individ-
            uals can be impossible to satisfy and litigation is common. Thorough pre-
            operative assessment to determine the patient’s wishes and frank discussion
            about what surgery can achieve and possible complications are imperative
            to avoid future unhappiness with outcomes. Detailed, contemporaneous
            notes should be kept and a ‘cooling off ’ period (2 weeks minimum) allowed
            between consultation and treatment.
               Ideally patients should be seen twice for consultation before surgery. The
            patient should be written to after each consultation with a summary of the
            discussion. Where necessary, a witness should be present if a consultation
            is likely to be contentious. Increasingly cosmetic practitioners are videoing
            consultations. Finally, the cost of treatment and who will pay for treatment
            of complications should be discussed prior to surgery, so there can be no
            doubt about the patient’s financial liability.
            Regulation of cosmetic practice
            A review of the regulation of cosmetic treatment in the UK was published
            in November 2015 by the Department of Health in response to the PIP
            breast implant incident. The key recommendations of the committee,
            chaired by the Chief Medical Officer, Sir Bruce Keogh are:
            •	The scope of the EU Medical Devices Directive should be extended
               to include all cosmetic implants including dermal fillers. UK legislation
               should be introduced to enact the changes sooner. Legislation should be
               introduced to classify fillers as a prescription-​only medical device.
            •	The Royal College of Surgeons (RCS) should establish an Inter-​specialty
               Committee on Cosmetic Surgery, made up of representatives of all the
               relevant specialty and professional associations. The purpose of this
               group is to set standards for cosmetic surgery practice and training, and
               make arrangements for formal certification of all surgeons regarded as
               competent to undertake cosmetic procedures, taking account of training
               and experience.
            •	All those performing cosmetic interventions must be registered.
               The Health Education England (HEE) mandate should include the
               development of appropriate accredited qualifications for providers
               of non-​surgical interventions and it should determine accreditation
               requirements for the various professional groups. This work was
               published in November 2015.
            • Surgical providers should provide both the person undergoing a
               procedure and their general practitioner with proper records.
            •	The RCS Inter-​specialty Committee on Cosmetic Surgery should
               develop and describe a multistage consent process for operations.
               Consent must be taken by the surgeon performing the operation to
               ensure that the patient and practitioner have a shared understanding of
               the desired outcome and the limitations, implications, and risks of the
               procedure.
                                              Other considerations             375


•	Evidence-​based standardized patient information should be developed
  by the RCS Inter-​specialty Committee on Cosmetic Surgery, with input
  from patient organizations.
• For non-​surgical procedures, a record of consent must be held by the
  provider.
•	Existing advertising recommendations and restrictions should be
  updated and better enforced.
•	The use of financial inducements and time-​limited deals to promote
  cosmetic interventions should be prohibited to avoid inappropriate
  influencing of vulnerable consumers.
•	Accessible resolution and redress—​the remit of the Parliamentary and
  Health Service Ombudsman (PHSO) should be extended to cover the
  whole private healthcare sector. This will de facto include cosmetic
  procedures of all kinds.
•	All individuals performing cosmetic procedures must possess adequate
  professional indemnity cover that is commensurate with the type of
  operations being performed. For surgeons working in this country, but
  who are insured abroad, indemnity insurance must be commensurate
  with similar UK policies.
•	The Review Committee supports the future development of insurance
  products such as risk pool arrangements to cover product failure and
  certain complications of surgery.
Training in cosmetic surgery in the UK
Until recently there was no formal training pathway for cosmetic surgery
in the UK. Moreover, although the terms cosmetic and plastic surgery are
often used interchangeably by the public, surgeons from other specialties
other than plastic surgery also undertake cosmetic procedures. In 2007,
interface fellowships open to plastic, maxillofacial, ENT, ophthalmic and
breast surgeons in addition to dermatologists where established under the
auspices of the Joint Committee on Surgical Training. Fifteen fellowships
are available each year, and are awarded by competitive interview, are fully
funded, and last for 4 months.
376
 Chapter 9                                377



The temporomandibular
joint
Anatomy 378
Disorders 380
Trismus 381
Myofascial pain 382
Temporomandibular joint dysfunction 384
Temporomandibular joint replacement 388
Ankylosis 390
Dislocation 392
Rare disorders 394
378



      378       Chapter 9   The temporomandibular joint


            Anatomy
            Bones
            • A synovial joint between the mandibular condyle and the glenoid fossa
              of the temporal bone.
            • The lateral pole of the condyle lies 1–​1.5cm deep to the skin surface.
            • The condyle is narrower anteroposteriorly (8–​10mm) compared to
              mediolaterally (15–​20mm).
            • The glenoid fossa is bounded anteriorly by the articular eminence,
              limiting the anterior movement of the mandibular condyle.
            Disc
            • The fibrocartilaginous articular disc is made of types I/​II collagen,
              elastin, and ground substance with sparse cells.
            • The disc has a thickened periphery—​the annulus—​and a central
              depression.
            • The disc is tightly bound to the medial and lateral pole of the condyle by
              the capsular ligament and medial/​lateral collateral ligaments.
            • In the sagittal section the disc is biconcave in shape with a posterior
              bilaminar zone enclosing neurovascular tissue.
            • The articular disc divides the joint into upper and lower joint
              compartments.
            • Normally moves anteriorly with the head of the condyle on mouth
              opening.
            • The upper joint compartment contains 1.2mL and the lower contains
              0.9mL of synovial fluid.
            • The disc shows excellent healing ability.
            Ligaments
            • The lateral (temporomandibular) ligament is attached to the articular
              tubercle above and extends below at 45° to be attached to the
              posterior and lateral border of the condyle. It prevents posterior
              displacement of the mandibular condyle.
            • The stylomandibular ligament is a thickened band of deep cervical
              fascia, passing from the styloid process of the temporal bone to the
              angle of the mandible.
            • The sphenomandibular ligament is a long membranous band which lies
              medial to the TMJ, running from the spine of the sphenoid bone to the
              lingula on the medial aspect of the mandible.
            Muscles of mastication
            •   Supplied by motor division of V3.
            •   Elevation: temporalis, masseter, and medial pterygoid.
            •   Protrusion: lateral and medial pterygoids.
            •   Depression: lateral pterygoid, infra-​and suprahyoid muscles.
            •   Lateral excursion: contralateral pterygoids and ipsilateral temporalis.
                                                              Anatomy         379


Sensory innervation
• Branches of V3 via auriculotemporal, masseteric, and posterior deep
  temporal nerves.
• The articular tissues and central disc contain no nerves.
• The capsule, disc periphery, and retrodiscal bilaminar zone contain pain
  and proprioception fibres.
Blood supply
• Supplied by branches of the maxillary artery including the deep auricular
  and anterior tympanic arteries.
• Maxillary artery and its branches run deep to the condyle while the
  superficial temporal artery and its branches run superficially.
380



      380    Chapter 9      The temporomandibular joint


            Disorders
            Developmental
            • Aplasia/​hypoplasia of the joint/​condyle—​may be part of hemifacial
              microsomia.
            • Condylar hyperplasia.
            Acquired
            • Traumatic:
              • soft tissue—​internal derangement, capsular tearing, retrodiscal tissue
                 shearing, subluxation, effusion, haemarthrosis;
              • hard tissue—​fracture, condylar dislocation, heterotopic ossification.
            • Osteoarthritis.
            • Inflammatory:
              • seronegative spondyloarthropathies—​psoriatic arthritis, ankylosing
                 spondylitis, reactive arthritis;
              • other autoimmune disorders—​rheumatoid arthritis, juvenile
                 idiopathic arthritis.
            • Infectious:
              • haematogenous spread—​most common cause of septic TMJ arthritis;
              • local spread—​mandibular osteomyelitis, otitis media, parotitis;
              • direct inoculation—​open joint trauma.
            • Metabolic:
              • gout, pseudogout.
            • Neoplastic/​metaplastic:
              • benign—​osteochondroma, chondroblastoma, synovial
                 chondromatosis, pigmented villonodular synovitis;
              • malignant—​primary, secondary, both extremely rare.
            • Idiopathic:
              • Idiopathic condylar resorption (Fig. 9.1).




            Fig. 9. OPT showing idiopathic condylar resorption.
                                                                Trismus       381


Trismus
• Classic definition—​inability to open the mouth fully secondary to muscle
  spasm, typically described in the setting of tetanus.
• Common verbiage—​limited mouth opening secondary to any cause.
• Normal interincisal mouth opening is 35–​45mm.
Extra-​articular causes
• Mechanical factors:
  • depressed zygomatic arch fracture;
  • coronoid hyperplasia;
  • radiation fibrosis;
  • oral submucous fibrosis;
  • local malignancy;
  • bony exostoses.
• Muscular pain/​inflammation:
  • odontogenic infection;
  • trauma, including dentoalveolar surgery;
  • myofascial pain;
  • haematoma following LA injection;
  • tetanus;
  • quinsy.

Other extra-​articular cause include hysterical trismus.
Intra-​articular causes
• Mechanical factors:
  • internal derangement;
  • condylar fracture.;
  • haemarthrosis;
  • ankylosis (bony, fibrous);
  • osteophyte formation.
•	Pain/​inflammation:
  • septic arthritis.
382



      382    Chapter 9     The temporomandibular joint


            Myofascial pain
            Definition
            Chronic, persistent, regional pain disorder characterized by muscle tender-
            ness and limitation in range of motion, often with discrete muscular ‘trigger
            points’.
            • The most common cause of chronic pain.
            • Differentiated from other pain conditions such as complex regional pain
              syndrome and fibromyalgia, in that pain remains localized and autonomic
              dysfunction is not present.
            Aetiology
            •	Parafunctional habits; repetitive posturing; repetitive muscle activity (e.g.
              gum chewing).
            •	Psychosocial disorders including emotional stress.
            Imaging
            • 2D and 3D hard and soft tissue imaging will show no abnormalities of
              the masticatory muscles or muscles of facial expression.
            Clinical findings
            • Small, firm tissue bands (‘trigger points’) that reliably reproduce
              an identical distribution of regional pain on palpation, often with a
              stereotypical, animated patient response (‘jump sign’).
            • Injection of LA into trigger points reduces the referred pain.
            Management
            (See % Temporomandibular joint dysfunction, p. 384.)
            •	Psychosocial:
              • stress management;
              • sleep hygiene;
              • biofeedback.
            • Medication:
              • LA trigger point injections;
              • muscle relaxants;
              • tricyclic antidepressants.
            •	Physical therapy:
              • posture correction;
              • occlusal appliance therapy.
Myofascial pain   383
384



      384    Chapter 9    The temporomandibular joint


            Temporomandibular joint dysfunction
            • Most common non-​infective pain disorder of the orofacial region.
            • Meta-​analysis shows that the overall prevalence of TMJDS in population
              studies ranges from 30% to 45%.
            • More common in ♀; ♂:♀ ratio of 1:3.
            • Mean age is between 30 and 40 years.
            •	Pain is typically diffuse, cyclical, and distributed in multiple sites,
              especially the muscles of mastication; it is frequently worse in the
              morning.
            • Related to stress and parafunctional habits.
            • Associations: depression, back pain, tension headaches, migraine,
              irritable bowel syndrome, fibromyalgia.
            Features
            •	Pain.
            • Clicking.
            • Locking.
            • Crepitus.
            • Trismus.
            Clinical findings
            • Tenderness of the pre-​auricular region and muscles of mastication.
            • Clicking, usually with abnormal path of opening.
            •	Possible deviation on opening and asymmetric excursive movements.
            •	Evidence of parafunctional activity—​such as clenching causing dental
              attrition, linea alba affecting the buccal mucosa, scalloped tongue,
              masseteric hypertrophy, and biting of finger nails.
            Internal derangement
            •	Occurs where the articular disc within the joint interferes with smooth
              functioning of the joint.
            • Clicking usually indicates reducible displacement of the disc, most
              commonly anterior disc displacement with reduction (ADDwR).
            • Clicking is usually related to abnormal paths of opening, with protrusion
              and/​or lateral deviation.
            • Some patients will go on to develop locking.
            • Closed lock: mouth cannot open beyond around 25mm as the head of
              the condyle impinges on an anteriorly displaced disc.
            • Open lock: patient unable to close the mouth without manipulation,
              since condyle is trapped in front of posteriorly displaced disc.
            • Locks may be reducible (patient can manipulate the jaw to regain
              mobility) or irreducible.
            • Disc may perforate (associated with joint crepitus and the development
              of osteoarthritis).
            Investigations
            • Routine radiography does not change management in classical TMJDS.
            • An OPT may eliminate dental pathology radiating to the ear in a non-​
              classical pain pattern.
                          Temporomandibular joint dysfunction              385




Fig. 9.2 MRI of the right temporomandibular joint.

• Radiographic features of osteoarthritis:
  • narrowing of joint space;
  • bone cyst (geode) formation;
  • remodelling;
  • osteophyte formation.
• MRI is the gold standard imaging for the TMJs. It can be useful in the
  assessment of patients with trismus where a closed lock (or other
  pathology) is suspected (Fig. 9.2).
• Approximately 1/​3 of asymptomatic patients have anterior
  displacement of their discs on MRI scan.
• CT scanning is superior for assessing bone detail.
Management/​treatment
• Reassurance and explanation.
•	Education regarding parafunctional habits.
• Jaw exercises, e.g. straight line to eliminate click.
•	Physiotherapy.
• Analgesia.
•	Heat.
• Rest/​soft diet/​relaxation.
• Splints/​bite guards/​bite raising appliances:
  • variety of materials, designs, and for either jaw;
  • possible mechanisms of action include reduction of bruxism and
    other parafunctional habits, production of a gap between the condyle
    and fossa to free the disc, and possible placebo effect.
386



      386    Chapter 9    The temporomandibular joint

            Other interventions
            Tricyclic antidepressants
            •	Have analgesic and muscle relaxant effects independent of their
               antidepressant action. No RCTs show efficacy in TMJDS.
            Occlusal rehabilitation
            • No evidence of benefit.
            • Most patients with an abnormal occlusion do not suffer from TMJ pain.
            •	Orthodontic treatment or orthognathic surgery is not a treatment
              for TMJDS.
            Arthrocentesis and manipulation
            • To treat anteriorly displaced disc/​closed lock unresponsive to
              conservative measures.
            • Studies show 83% success rate in treating closed lock with
              arthrocentesis.
            • LA or GA.
            • Joint is washed out and adhesions freed (lysis and lavage).
            • Medicaments placed:
              • triamcinolone—​for pain and arthritic change; overuse of steroids may
                 cause condylar resorption;
              • bupivacaine, morphine—​for pain;
              • hyaluronic acid—​to aid in closed lock.

            Arthroscopy
            • For diagnosis ± treatment.
            •	Performed under GA.
            • Allows lysis and lavage.
            •	Other suggested procedures and benefits:
              • surgical freeing of adhesions;
              • fixation of retrodiscal tissues to eliminate anterior dislocation;
              • meniscopexy (fixing the disc into a posterior position);
              • eminoplasty for treatment of recurrent dislocation.
            • Complications (greater than for arthrocentesis):
              • perforation of middle cranial fossa, EAM, tympanic membrane or
                 middle ear;
              • bleeding into EAM;
              • haemarthrosis;
              • auriculotemporal and facial nerve injuries.
            • Direct comparison studies between arthrocentesis and arthroscopy
              have shown arthroscopy to be slightly more effective than
              arthrocentesis in improving maximal incisal opening.
            • Arthroscopy allows intra-​articular pathology to be observed and
              treated.
            Open procedures
            • Meniscopexy.
            • Meniscectomy.
            • Condylar shaves.
            •	Eminectomy.
                        Temporomandibular joint dysfunction                     387


Surgical approaches to the TMJ
• Skin incision: tragal or pre-​tragal with temporal extension (Bramley/​Al-​
  Kayat is one modification).
• Dissection at cephalad aspect to temporalis fascia.
• At caudal aspect along the avascular plane anterior to the cartilaginous
  tragus.
• Join up cephalad and caudal aspects posterior to the parotid until root
  of zygomatic arch can be palpated.
• Incise superficial layer of temporalis fascia to expose superficial
  temporal fat pad layer.
• Incise periosteum over the arch reflecting the flap anteriorly along with
  frontal branch of CN VII (runs just deep to the temporoparietal fascia).
•	Expose TMJ capsule (+ eminence if required).
Meniscopexy
• Indicated in closed lock, which has not responded to conservative
  measures.
• Incise capsule.
•	Explore upper and lower joint spaces.
• Identify and mobilize disc by freeing the adhesions.
• Fix disc posteriorly either by suturing to the periosteum of the
  zygomatic arch with non-​resorbable suture or using a Mitek/​Arthrex
  anchor embedded in the posterolateral aspect of the condylar head.
Meniscectomy
• May be indicated in significant disc degeneration or perforation.
• Dissection should ensure complete disc removal (medial aspect may be
  difficult to access).
• Some advocate interpositional pedicled temporalis fascia over
  condylar head.
Condylar shave
•	High condylar shave usually used to treat degenerative disorders such as
  osteoarthritis.
• The procedure helps recreate a smooth articular surface by removal of
  the osteophytes in osteoarthritis.
Eminectomy
• May be of benefit in a closed lock and avoids entering the joint space.
• Also used by some in recurrent dislocation.
38



     388    Chapter 9    The temporomandibular joint


           Temporomandibular joint replacement
           Indications and contraindications
           • In the USA, no formal guidelines exist for temporomandibular joint
             replacement (TJR) surgery.
           •	However, in the UK, BAOMS has adopted the following guidelines and
             indications for TJR on behalf of UK TMJ replacement surgeons:
           •	Prerequisite: failed conservative management (including arthroscopy if
             possible).
           • Diagnosis: CT or MRI as a minimum evaluation.
           • Diseases involving condylar bone loss:
             • degenerative joint disease (osteoarthrosis);
             • inflammatory joint disease (e.g. rheumatoid arthritis, juvenile
                idiopathic arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, etc.);
             • ankylosis;
             • post-​traumatic or postoperative condylar loss;
             • previous prosthetic reconstruction or costochondral grafting;
             • serious congenital or acquired deformity including pathology;
             • multiple previous procedures.
           • Indications (usually a combination of the following):
             • dietary score of <5/​10 (liquid scores 0, full diet scores 10);
             • restricted mouth opening (<35mm);
             • occlusal collapse (anterior open bite or mandibular retrusion);
             • excessive condylar resorption and loss of ramus height;
             • pain score >5/​10 on the visual analogue scale;
             • other quality of life issues.
           • Absolute contraindications:
             • local infective process;
             • severe immunocompromise.
           • Relative contraindications:
             • insufficient local bone;
             • documented allergy to trace metals (e.g. nickel, although nickel-​free
                prostheses are available);
             • severe parafunctional habits;
             • inability to cooperate with physical therapy.

           Options
           (See Fig. 9.3.)
           •	Pre-​formed (stock).
           • Custom made.
           Complications
           • Loosening or displacement.
           • Infection.
           • Dislocation.
           • Foreign body or allergic reaction to implant components.
           • Wearing through of the fossa material.
           • Facial nerve damage.
           • Malocclusion.
           •	Hearing complaints.
                           Temporomandibular joint replacement             389




Fig. 9.3 Biomet total joint replacement.

Prosthetic joint infection
• Total joint replacement infection rate is ~1.5–​2.7%.
• Mean time to joint infection is 6 months, but can range to over a
  decade.
• Most common organisms isolated:
  • Staphylococcus aureus;
  • S. epidermidis;
  • Propionibacterium acnes;
  • Peptostreptococcus spp.
•	Prevention of TJR colonization and infection.
• Reduction of bacterial burden:
  • preoperative chlorhexidine scrub by patient;
  • intraoperative EAC and facial antisepsis;
  • perioperative antibiotics;
  • consideration for soaking prostheses in antibiotic solution prior to
    implantation.
•	Preoperative management of co-​morbidities:
  • diabetes control;
  • immunosuppressive medication management (in general, disease-​
    modifying antirheumatic drugs can be continued but biologics should
    be stopped until soft tissue healing is established);
  • nicotine use (stop 4–​6 weeks minimum prior to surgery);
  • optimize cardiopulmonary conditions.
390



      390    Chapter 9     The temporomandibular joint


            Ankylosis
            Definition
            • Fusion of the joint with reduced or absent movement.
            •	Usually intra-​articular (true ankylosis) (Fig. 9.4).
            •	Extra-​articular (false ankylosis) may occur with fusion between the
              zygoma and the coronoid process following trauma. Treated with
              coronoidectomy.
            Causes of true ankylosis
            • Adults: usually trauma.
            • Childhood: trauma (intracapsular fracture) or infection (usually middle
              ear/​mastoid).
            • Inflammatory arthritides can result in ankylosis in children and adults.
            • Bilateral early childhood or congenital ankylosis results in micrognathia
              and a bird-​face deformity.
            •	Unilateral growth impairment from ankylosis results in secondary
              changes in the occlusal plane and facial asymmetry.
            Investigation
            • CT ± 3D CAD/​CAM or stereolithographic modelling.
            • CTA may be helpful in ankylosis to identify the maxillary artery or
              branches requiring embolization prior to open surgery.
            Special considerations
            • Difficult intubation—​awake fibreoptic or tracheostomy.




            Fig. 9.4 Reformatted CT showing bony ankylosis.
                                                                   Ankylosis   391


Approach
•	Upper as per surgical approach to TMJ.
• Lower approach is also required if joint replacement is planned
  (retromandibular approach).
• Facial nerve trunk passes in the bridge of tissue between the upper and
  lower surgical approach.
• Ankylotic mass exposed.
• Condylar neck is mainly resected with a burr or piezo knife and the
  deepest aspect completed by fracturing the remaining cortex.
• The ankylotic mass is removed by dissection or by bony sculpturing of a
  new fossa.
• Beware:
  • intracranial proximity;
  • proximity to the ear canal;
  • maxillary/​middle meningeal arteries (Fig. 9.5);
  • pterygoid venous plexus.
• Gap arthroplasty:
  • creates false joint at the condylar neck;
  • interposition of local tissue or alloplastic material.
•	Partial joint replacement: costochondral graft, but growth is
  unpredictable in children.
•	Prosthetic total joint replacement in adults.




Fig. 9.5 Proximity of the maxillary artery (arrow) on a CT angiogram.
392



      392    Chapter 9     The temporomandibular joint


            Dislocation
            • Dislocation: irreducible condylar displacement—​usually anterior to the
              articular eminence.
            Causes
            •	Extremes in use (wide opening, yawning, emesis, iatrogenic: dental/​
              medical procedures).
            • Trauma.
            • Lax ligaments (Ehlers–​Danlos syndrome, Marfan syndrome).
            • Neuromuscular conditions (seizure, orofacial dystonias or dyskinesias—​
              may be secondary to antipsychotic medication).
            Clinical findings
            Acute TMJ dislocation
            • Defined as dislocation due to a specific event.
            • Apertognathia (bilateral dislocation) versus chin point deviation
              (unilateral dislocation) with pain and limited function.
            • Most commonly dislocated anteriorly (into the infratemporal space), but
              can be dislocated in association with trauma and or fracture(s):
              • superiorly—​into the middle cranial fossa;
              • laterally—​into the temporal space;
              • posteriorly—​into the EAC.

            Recurrent TMJ dislocation
            • Defined as recurrent acute events, often with daily function, that then
              resolve.
            •	Often associated with systemic causes (i.e. neuromuscular or collagen
              vascular diseases).
            Chronic TMJ dislocation
            (See Fig. 9.6.)
            • Defined as dislocation lasting at least 72 hours, although original
              definition was >1 month.
            •	Pseudo-​joint formation resulting in rotation without translation; muscle
              fibrosis and glenoid scarring occur.
            Management
            Conservative
            •	Often successful for isolated acute dislocation events:
              • stimulation of the gag reflex may be successful in some situations;
              • manipulation via sustained pressure on the posterior teeth to
                overcome masseteric spasm;
              • postoperative management: facial bandage, non-​steroidal anti-​
                inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), muscle relaxant, patient to support
                chin when yawning.
                                                                  Dislocation   393




Fig. 9.6 Chronic dislocation into the infratemporal fossa with dentofacial
compensation.

Minor procedures
•	Often successful for recurrent dislocation:
  • autologous blood injection to the joint space;
  • sclerosant injection to the joint space;
  • botulinum toxin injection to the pterygoid muscles, with or without
    USS/​EMG guidance;
  • these can be combined with a period of IMF.

Open surgical/​arthroscopic
• For recurrent dislocation:
  • augment eminence, e.g. —​downfracture zygomatic arch (Dautrey
    procedure);
  • remove eminence, e.g. —​eminectomy (Myrhaug procedure);
  • capsulorrhaphy.
• For chronic dislocation (if there is significant fibrosis):
  • myotomies/​coronoidectomy;
  • condylectomy;
  • gap arthroplasty with TJR.
394



      394    Chapter 9     The temporomandibular joint


            Rare disorders
            Septic arthritis (of a native joint)
            • Three routes of entry:
              • haematogenous (most common);
              • spread of local infection;
              • direct inoculation (e.g. penetrating trauma).
            • Most common organisms:
              • S. aureus;
              • Neisseria spp.;
              • Haemophilus spp.;
              • Streptococcus spp.
            • May clinically present as internal derangement with jaw deviation,
              limited opening, and pain.
            • Diagnosis by:
              • imaging: may or may not demonstrate a widened joint space;
              • investigation—​joint aspirate for microscopy and culture and sensitivity,
                 bloods—​glucose, white cell count (WCC), CRP, erythrocyte
                 sedimentation rate (ESR);
            • Treatment is with IV antibiotics but aspirational drainage or open
              debridement may be required.
            Neoplastic
            Benign
            •	Osteochondroma.
            •	Osteomas.
            • Synovial chondromatosis (a metaplastic process):
              • multiple nodules of cartilage formed as loose bodies in joint space;
              • treatment with removal and synovectomy;
              • recurrence is common.

            Malignant
            • Secondary metastases, (breast, bronchus, kidney, thyroid, or prostate).
            •	Osteosarcoma.
            • Invasion from local malignancy: parotid, oral SCC, cutaneous
              malignancy.
            Inflammatory
            • Inflammatory arthropathies (rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthritis,
              juvenile idiopathic arthritis) frequently show radiographic features
              without symptoms.
            • Radiographic features are erosions and resorption.
            • May cause progressive anterior open bite. Should be stable prior to
              definitive orthognathic intervention.
                                                           Rare disorders   395


Idiopathic condylar resorption
• Idiopathic condylar resorption is a progressive alteration in condylar
  shape and change in condylar mass of unknown aetiology (Fig. 9.7).
• 9:1 ♀:♂ ratio. Usually manifests in young adulthood.
• Majority are asymptomatic; however, TMJ pain, myofascial pain, or
  headaches are not uncommon symptoms.
•	Progressive decrease in posterior facial height, retrognathism, and the
  development of an anterior open bite with clockwise rotation of the
  mandible.
•	Has been associated with rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus
  erythematosus, scleroderma, and neoplasia. Steroid use is also a
  predisposing factor, but in the majority of patients, no predisposing
  cause is found, hence the term idiopathic condylar resorption.
• Treatment includes total joint replacement ± orthognathic surgery to
  correct the secondary deformity (Fig. 9.8).




Fig. 9.7 Reformatted CT showing idiopathic condylar resorption.
396



      396    Chapter 9       The temporomandibular joint




            Fig. 9.8 Bilateral total joint replacement in a patient with idiopathic condylar
            resorption.
 Chapter 0                                           397



Surgical principles and
oral surgery
General surgical principles 398
Anaesthesia 402
Management of the medically compromised patient 408
Dentoalveolar surgery 414
Odontogenic infections 422
Non-​odontogenic infections 428
Biopsy 429
Cysts 430
Intraoral benign tumours 434
Bone disorders: neoplastic 436
Bone disorders: non-​neoplastic 437
Classic radiographic appearances of jaw lesions 438
Neck lumps 440
Facial palsy 444
Paranasal sinuses 446
Osseointegrated implants 448
398



      398    Chapter 0     Surgical principles and oral surgery


            General surgical principles
            Informed consent
            • Should be obtained by a clinician who is capable of performing the
              procedure, or who has been trained to obtain consent for that specific
              procedure (General Medical Council (GMC) guidelines).1
            • A patient must have capacity to give consent.
            • An adult (age 16) should be assumed have capacity.
            • Informed consent is a two-​stage, shared process.2
            • Appropriate and specific information should be available about the risks
              and benefits, including the option of no treatment.
            • Gillick competency applies to a child <16 years who has capacity to give
              consent to an intervention.
            •	The law where a child with capacity disagrees with their parents is
              complex and differs within the UK. Legal advice may need to be sought.
            •	The Mental Capacity Act 2005 gave legal status to advance directives
              (living wills) and to an appointed advocate.
            Preventing thromboembolic disease
            (See NICE guidelines, 2018.3)
            • Assess patients for risk factors preoperatively.
            • Advise stopping combined oral contraceptive pill (OCP) 4 weeks before
              surgery.
            • Discuss risks and benefits of prophylaxis with patients.
            • Discuss signs and symptoms to look for following discharge.
            • Advise to seek advice on flying in the postoperative period.
            Risk factors
            • Age >60 years.
            • Bed or chair bound >3 days before surgery, including intensive care unit.
            • Dehydration.
            • Surgery >1h.
            • Acute cancer.
            • Acute cardiac or respiratory failure.
            • Previous DVT or pulmonary embolus (PE) in self or close relative.
            • OCP or hormone replacement therapy.
            • Inherited thrombophilias.
            • Antiphospholipid syndrome.
            • Pregnancy.
            • Myeloproliferative disease.
            • Nephrotic syndrome.
            • Varicose veins with phlebitis.
            • Obesity (BMI >30 kg/​m2).
            Prophylaxis includes
            • Graduated compression—​use thromboembolic deterrent (TED)
              stockings.
            • Intermittent pneumatic compression or foot impulse devices
              intraoperatively.
                                        General surgical principles             399


• LMWH.
• Maintenance of hydration.
•	Encouraging early mobilization.
Preventing surgical infections
Healthcare-​associated infections (HAIs)4 include:
• Surgical site infection.
•	Respiratory and urinary tract infection.
• Bacteraemias, including methicillin-​resistant Staphylococcus aureus
  (MRSA).
• Antibiotic associated diarrhoeas, including Clostridium difficile.
Surgical site infection
• Occurs in 5% of all operations.
• Comprises 20% of HAIs.
Reduction in surgical site infections
Preoperatively
• Avoid routine hair removal.
• If hair has to be removed, use electric clippers with a single-​use head on
  the day of surgery (do not use razors).
• Give antibiotic prophylaxis to patients before clean surgery involving the
  placement of a prosthesis or implant, clean-​contaminated surgery, or
  contaminated surgery.
• Do not use antibiotic prophylaxis for clean, non-​prosthetic surgery.
• Use local antibiotic formulary and always consider potential adverse
  effects when choosing specific antibiotics for prophylaxis.
• Consider giving a single dose of antibiotic prophylaxis intravenously at
  start of anaesthesia.
• Give a repeat dose of antibiotic prophylaxis when the length of the
  operation exceeds the half-​life of the antibiotic.
• Give antibiotic treatment (in addition to prophylaxis) to patients having
  surgery on a dirty or infected wound.
Intraoperatively
• Antiseptic skin preparation use alcoholic over aqueous and
   chlorohexidine over iodine.
• Avoid diathermy for surgical skin incisions.
• Maintain sterile operating conditions.
• Maintain patient homeostasis.
• Cover surgical incisions with an appropriate interactive dressing at the
   end of the operation.
Postoperative phase
• Use an aseptic non-​touch technique for changing or removing surgical
  wound dressings.
• Use sterile saline for wound cleansing up to 48h after surgery.
• Advise patients that they may shower safely 48h after surgery.
40



     400    Chapter 0           Surgical principles and oral surgery

           • Do not use topical antimicrobial agents for surgical wounds that are
             healing by primary intention to reduce the risk of surgical site infection.
           •	Refer to a tissue viability nurse (or another healthcare professional
             with suitable expertise) for advice on appropriate dressings for the
             management of surgical wounds that are healing by secondary intention.
           References
           1. General Medical Council (under review 2020). Consent guidance: patients and doctors making
              decisions together. M https://​www.gmc-​uk.org/​ethical-​guidance/​ethical-​guidance-​for-​doctors/​
              consent
           2. Montgomery (2015). Montgomery v Lanarkshire Health Board [2015] SC 11 [2015] 1 AC 1430.
           3. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) (2018, updated 2019). Venous thrombo-
              embolism in over 16s: reducing the risk of hospital-​acquired deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary
              embolism. NICE guideline [NG89]. M https://​www.nice.org.uk/​guidance/​ng89
           4. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) (2019). Surgical site infections: preven-
              tion and treatment. NICE guideline [NG125]. M https://​www.nice.org.uk/​guidance/​ng125
General surgical principles   401
402



      402    Chapter 0     Surgical principles and oral surgery


            Anaesthesia
            The choice of anaesthesia includes LA, LA and sedation (IV or oral),
            and GA.
              The choice of anaesthesia is governed by:
            • Patient acceptance.
            • Patient suitability.
            • Complexity of procedure.
            • Duration of procedure.
            • Available personnel and facilities.
            Local anaesthesia
            Topical anaesthetics
            • Lidocaine paste (5%) or spray (10%) for oral mucosa.
            •	Tetracaine, lidocaine, or amethocaine for conjunctiva.
            • Cocaine 4% for nasal mucosa.
            •	Eutectic mixture of local anaesthetics (EMLA), lidocaine, and prilocaine
              for skin—​effective to 5mm depth.
            • Ametop®: topical amethocaine.
            Injected LA
            • Lidocaine 2% with 1 in 80,000 adrenaline: commonest for intraoral and
               skin surgery.
            • Maximum safe dose of lidocaine is 7.0mg/​kg (with adrenaline) and
               3.0mg/​kg (without adrenaline).
            • 1mL of 2% lidocaine contains 20mg.
            • Prilocaine 3% with Octapressin—​less vasoconstriction than adrenaline.
            • Maximum safe dose of prilocaine is 4mg/​kg.
            • Articaine 4% with 1 in 100,000 adrenaline. Popular in dental practice due
               to fast onset of action. Use for ID blocks not recommended because of
               risk of long-​term sensory impairment.
            • Bupivacaine 0.25 or 0.5% ± adrenaline. Long acting but 30min onset of
               action. Useful for postoperative pain relief.
            • Maximum safe dose of bupivacaine is 2mg/​kg.
            • Levobupivacaine has similar properties to bupivacaine, but lower
               toxicity. Hence safer.
            LA injection techniques
            • Block of named nerve, e.g. ID, lingual, infraorbital.
            • Block of anatomical structure: diamond-​shaped infiltration around
              nose/​ear.
            • Infiltration: dental, skin.
            • Intraligamentary.
            Complications of LA
            • Failure:
              • poor technique—​not enough or in wrong place;
              • local infection;
              • unusual anatomy.
            • Intravascular injection:
              • ischaemic area on face;
              • haematoma;
                                                             Anaesthesia         403

  • LA toxicity;
  • mild transient palpitations and hypertension (especially if mixed with
    adrenaline).
• Rarely:
  • facial palsy;
  • needle tract infection;
  • soft tissue trauma.

Sedation
 Only conscious sedation is safe practice without the presence of a
 second team member acting as sedationist or anaesthetist. Intercollegiate
 Advisory Committee recommendations should always be followed.
 Informed consent is essential before administration.

• Inhalation—​titrated mix of nitrous oxide (N2O) and O2 (Entonox®):
   • common in dental practice;
   • quick onset and recovery;
   • good safety margin;
   • useful in children—​gives sedation and good analgesia;
   • contraindicated in first trimester of pregnancy.
• Intravenous (IV):
   • benzodiazepines cause hypnosis, sedation, and amnesia.
   • the elderly and young children are very sensitive—​children may
     become hyperstimulated rather than sedated;
   • single drug sedation is safer. Midazolam is the drug of choice for
     IV—​it has a short half-​life, good amnesic properties and fast recovery;
     the dose should be titrated to the patient’s response—​5mL ampoules
     containing 5mg of drug recommended;
   • minimum monitoring should include oxygen saturation (pulse
     oximetry) and BP—​suitable resuscitation facilities and trained staff
     should be available;
   • flumazenil is a specific antagonist to benzodiazepines—​due to a short
     half-​life, more than one dose or infusion may be required (dose 200
     micrograms plus 100 micrograms/​min until reversal);
   • multiple drug sedation techniques should preferably be carried
     out by trained anaesthetists; fentanyl and midazolam is a popular
     combination;
   • Propofol sedation target controlled infusion is becoming increasingly
     popular—​rapid onset, short acting, amnesic, and antiemetic.
     Specific syringe pumps needed and anaesthetist as well as operating
     department practitioner’s presence is recommended.
• Oral:
   • midazolam 0.5mg/​kg up to a maximum of 20mg. Most
     commonly used.
   • temazepam 10–​30mg taken 1h preoperatively;
   • unpredictable in its effects;
   • consent the patient before administration;
   • buccal preparations also available but not yet licensed for sedation.
• Rectal or intranasal:
   • unpredictable absorption.
40



     404    Chapter 0      Surgical principles and oral surgery

           General anaesthesia
           Regulations from the General Dental Council
           The Poswillo Committee recommendations (1990) effectively removed the
           use of GA and regulated the use of sedation in general dental practice. The
           2001 GDC recommendations added to these and failure to comply risks
           charge of serious professional misconduct for those regulated by the GDC.
               GA for dental procedures should be available only where appropriate fa-
           cilities exist—​in effect in a hospital setting. The referring practitioner must:
           •	Take a full medical history, explain the risks and alternatives to a GA.
           • Justify the need for GA in the referral letter.
           •	Retain a copy of the letter.
           Fitness for anaesthesia
           The American Society of Anaesthesiologists (ASA) classification is
           widely used:
           • ASA grading:
              • 1: normal healthy patient;
              • 2: patient with mild systemic disease, smoker, and BMI of 30–​40;
              • 3: patient with severe systemic disease, heavy smoker or alcoholic. BMI >40;
              • 4: patient with severe systemic disease that is a constant threat to life;
              • 5: moribund patient not expected to survive without surgery;
           •	The risk of complications (morbidity as well as mortality) following a
              GA correlates well with the ASA grading.
           Preoperative assessment
           Includes:
           •	History of presenting problem, medical history, and systemic enquiry.
           •	Examination of presenting problem and cardiovascular system/​
             respiratory system.
           • Physical examinations to assess suitability for GA:
             • BP and pulse;
             • routine investigations such as biochemistry and haematology,
                especially in ASA 2–​3 patients;
             • group and save/​cross-​match as per local blood ordering policies;
             •	ECG if indicated;
             • CXR if indicated (Royal College of Radiologists guidelines). Very
                rarely used these days.
           • Special investigations, e.g. echocardiogram, lung function tests when indicated.
           Principles of general anaesthesia
           Anaesthesia is the combination of analgesia, hypnosis, and muscle relax-
           ation. Induction and maintenance of anaesthesia may be performed by IV
           or inhalation agents.
           • IV agents:
              • propofol: most popular;
              • thiopentone;
              • ketamine.
           • Inhalation agents:
              • N2O (also strong analgesic);
              • sevoflurane;
              • isoflurane;
              • desflurane.
                                                              Anaesthesia          405


• Muscle relaxants:
  • used to aid tracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation;
  • depolarizing agents, e.g. suxamethonium (short acting, not used
    commonly, but still drug of choice in rapid sequence induction);
  • non-​depolarizing agents, e.g. rocuronium, vecuronium, atracurium
    (reversible with neostigmine and sugammadex).
• Analgesics (opioids):
  • used to supplement anaesthesia, e.g. remifentanil, ultrashort-​acting (best
    administered by continuous infusion) and alfentanil (as aid to induction);
  • used for perioperative analgesia, e.g. morphine, fentanyl.

Airway control
Basic airway management techniques to maintain, but not secure the airway
include:
• Suction/​removal of debris and foreign bodies.
• Chin lift, head tilt, and jaw thrust (triple manoeuvre).
• Oral (Guedel) airway.
• Nasopharyngeal airway.
In practice, a combination of these is often required, particularly in the
trauma situation.
   Definitive airway management skills for OMFS include:
• Laryngeal mask airway (LMA).
•	Endotracheal intubation (oral, nasal)—​may require blind or fibreoptic
   techniques.
• Surgical airways.
Procedures involving airway suctioning or manipulation, such as intubation
or tracheostomy are aerosol generating procedures and as such, pose a
transmission risk of Covid 19.
The laryngeal mask airway
The LMA is commonly used in dentoalveolar surgery and other less major
procedures. LMAs are single use. Reinforced LMAs are used in intraoral sur-
gery for their flexibility. Paralysis is not necessary, and patients can breathe
spontaneously. Care must be taken not to dislodge the mask and lose the
airway when manipulating the mandible. Anchoring the tube buccal to the
mouth prop and teeth usually works well. Good communication with the
anaesthetist is essential as it is a genuine shared airway scenario.
Endotracheal intubation
Intubation requires neuromuscular relaxation to enable passage of the tube
through the cords. This may be carried out under direct vision with the use of
a laryngoscope. Where there is trismus or potential difficulty in viewing the
cords, intubation may be carried out with the aid of video laryngoscope, e.g.
GlideScope® or McGrath blade (asleep techniques). In cases of extremely
limited mouth opening, an awake intubation technique using a fibreoptic
endoscope is preferred. The airway is protected by a subglottic inflatable
cuff. Be aware if a throat pack is placed (National Patient Safety Agency guid-
ance1). The routine use of throat packs has been questioned and discouraged
in a joint statement by Difficult Airway Society (DAS), the British Association
of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery (BAOMS) and the British Association of
Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery (ENT-​UK) (2018).
406



      406    Chapter 0      Surgical principles and oral surgery

            Surgical airways
            Indication—​actual or anticipated failure to secure the airway in any other
            manner:
            • Needle cricothyroidotomy.
            • Surgical cricothyroidotomy. These kits must be kept available in
              anaesthetic rooms as part of a difficult airway trolley.
            • Surgical or percutaneous tracheostomy.
            GA in OMFS has special features requiring sharing of the upper airway.
            Potential upper airway obstruction in oncology/​trauma/​cervicofacial infections
            • Summon senior anaesthetic help early.
            • Discussion of potential problem with whole team—​what do you and
              the anaesthetist plan in case of failed intubation?
            • Consider not attempting GA.
            • Consider awake/​fibreoptic, or blind intubation (useful skill but not
              currently recommended by the Difficult Airway Society).
            • Difficult airway trolley should be available and familiar to you.
            • Consider surgical airway under LA and then GA once airway secure.
            • Failed intubation in a difficult airway—​communication and preparation
              between surgeon and anaesthetist are essential. Options:
              • wake the patient up if non-​emergency surgery;
              • LMA and surgical airway if other indications;
              • emergency cricothyroidotomy is rarely indicated, but a safer first
                 step than emergency tracheostomy in a dire situation. Hence, it is
                 recommended to start such cases in the operating theatre itself, with
                 the surgical team scrubbed up to perform surgical rescue if needed.
            Other anaesthetic considerations in major
            maxillofacial surgery
            Hypotensive anaesthesia
            • Inhalational anaesthetic agents (e.g. sevoflurane), opioids (e.g.
              remifentanil infusion), beta-​blockers (e.g. labetalol), or direct
              vasodilators (e.g. glyceryl trinitrate infusion) are all commonly used
              agents.
            •	Recommended in orthognathic surgery, this has revolutionized the
              morbidity of these procedures.
            • Less profound hypotensive anaesthesia is used in major head and neck
              oncology cases, although it is less well tolerated in this group who are
              often arteriopaths.
            • Let the anaesthetist know when you are due to start wound closure, so
              that the BP can be brought up to ensure adequate haemostasis.
            • Beware of postoperative rebound hypertension and bleeding.
            Management of head and neck oncology cases
            •	Elective tracheostomy policy.
            • Practice varies widely between units, and both conservative and more
              aggressive approaches to elective tracheostomy in head and neck
              surgery have pros and cons:
                                                                              Anaesthesia               407


• Conservative approach—​elective tracheostomy in only:
  • bilateral neck dissection;
  • posterior tumours;
  • mandibulotomy cases;
  • those with co-​morbidity, such as chest disease, heavy smokers, or
    alcoholics;
  • previous radiotherapy to head and neck;
  • in other cases, patient remains intubated overnight—​some may
    require later tracheostomy due to failure to extubate.
• Aggressive approach:
  • higher rate of elective tracheostomy is practised in some units, often
    with the patient returning to a high dependency area of the head and
    neck ward;
  • some cases will have tracheostomy-​related complications.
• No adequate RCTs have compared approaches.
References
1. Curran, J., Ward, M., Knepil, G.J. (2009). Safer Practice Notice –​Reducing the risk of retained
   throat packs after surgery. National Patient Safety Agency. M https://​www.medis-​medical.com/​
   content-​files/​NPSA-​Report-​Reducing-​Risk-​Retained-​Throat-​Packs-​Surgery.pdf
2. Athanassoglou, V., Patel, A., McGuire, B., Higgs, A., Dover, M.S., Brennan, P.A., et al. (2018).
   Systematic review of benefits or harms of routine anaesthetist-​          inserted throat packs in
   adults: practice recommendations for inserting and counting throat packs: an evidence-​based
   consensus statement by the Difficult Airway Society (DAS), the British Association of Oral and
   Maxillofacial Surgery (BAOMS) and the British Association of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and
   Neck Surgery (ENT-​UK). Anaesthesia 73(5): 612–​8.
408



      408    Chapter 0      Surgical principles and oral surgery


            Management of the medically
            compromised patient
            • Steroid therapy.
            •	Those at risk of endocarditis.
            • Anticoagulant/​antiplatelet therapy.
            • Bisphosphonates.
            • Osteoradionecrosis.
            Readers are referred to other texts for the management of other medical
            conditions.
            Steroids
            Those on exogenous steroids develop hypothalamic-​adrenocortical sup-
            pression. At times of stress, the normal physiological response is for the
            adrenal medulla to secrete catecholamines. These bind to vascular alpha
            and beta adrenoreceptors to divert blood flow as may be required in a ‘fight
            and flight’ response. Receptor response to catecholamines is dependent on
            the presence of corticosteroids, which are usually simultaneously secreted
            at times of stress from the adrenal cortex. In the absence of steroids, the
            net result of the catecholamine surge on the cardiovascular system can be
            a precipitous fall in BP—​this is the basis of a steroid crisis. There are no
            recorded cases of steroid crisis in OMFS (two reported cases were not
            worked up for other causes of postoperative hypotension), and there are
            a maximum of six cases in the English-​speaking literature related to trauma
            and other surgical procedures where the diagnosis is likely.
               Historically, patients having surgery have been managed by vari-
            ably increasing the steroid dose, e.g. doubling the oral dose or giving IV
            supplementation.
               Current thinking is as follows:
            LA
            • Patients on <7.5mg prednisolone/​day do not require cover.
            •	Those on higher doses can double the dose on the day of surgery only.
            GA
            • Minor surgery—​100mg hydrocortisone IV preoperatively (IM
              absorption unpredictable).
            • Major surgery—​100mg hydrocortisone IV preoperatively and 50mg 8h
              for 48h.
            • Dose and management varies with steroid dose and severity of surgery.
            Patients at risk of infective endocarditis
            There is no good evidence that antibiotic prophylaxis reduces the risk of
            infective endocarditis (IE) in susceptible patients. Current guidelines (NICE,
            2016)1 have ruled that antibiotic prophylaxis for infective endocarditis
            should no longer be given.
               The Scottish Dental Clinical Effectiveness Programme (SDCEP) (2017)2
            guidelines concur with NICE but advise extra caution/​antibiotic prophylaxis
            and cardiology advice for:
            • Prosthetic or transcatheter valves + prosthetic material used for valve repair.
            • Previous endocarditis.
          Management of the medically compromised patient                              409


• Cyanotic congenital heart disease.
•	Repaired congenital heart disease with prosthetic material up to
  6 months after or where shunt or regurgitation remains.
Patients having surgery should be advised to look out for signs of IE, risks of
antibiotic prophylaxis, and antibiotic resistance.
Anticoagulants/​antiplatelets
• Warfarin—​inhibits the production of vitamin K-​dependent clotting
  factors II, VII, IX, and X.
• Non-​vitamin K antagonist oral anticoagulants (NOACs) rivaroxaban/​
  apixaban—​direct, reversible, competitive, and selective inhibitor of
  factor Xa and dabigatran—​direct factor 11a inhibitor. Widely used in
  patients with non-​valvular atrial fibrillation and for the treatment and
  prevention of venous thromboembolism. Cannot be monitored with
  international normalized ratio (INR)/​prothrombin time.
• Aspirin irreversibly inhibits the thromboxane A2 stage of the COX
  pathway responsible for degranulation of platelets.
• Clopidogrel/​prasugrel irreversibly blockade the P2Y12 receptor ADP
  receptor on platelets inhibiting aggregation. Has synergistic effect with aspirin.
•	Ticagrelor reversibly binds the P2Y12 receptor and non-​competitively
  blocks ADP. Greater platelet inhibition and no metabolic activation
  required with platelet reactivity returning to normal in 3 days.
• Platelet life span is around 9 days, so it takes 5–​10 days for adequate
  numbers of functional platelets to reach the circulation following
  stopping irreversible platelet inhibitors.
Warfarin
• Check the patient’s INR card at the first appointment to assess control
  and target.
• Dentoalveolar surgery is safe up to an INR of 4.0—​result within the
  preceding 24h (use carboxymethyl cellulose packs and suturing of
  sockets routinely).
• Major surgery:
  • emergency—​consider use of prothrombin complex concentrate
    (this has superseded fresh frozen plasma) and/​or vitamin K with
    haematology advice, see British National Formulary for details;
  • elective—​discontinue warfarin 3 days preoperatively covering those
    with prosthetic cardiac valves with LMWH. Restart warfarin on day of
    surgery and continue LMWH until INR in target range.
NOAC
• Apixaban/​rivaroxaban—​no reversal agent—​in emergency, consider
  factor replacement with haematology advice.
• Dabigatran can be reversed with idarucizumab in emergencies and
  under haematology advice.1
• Dentoalveolar surgery—​higher bleeding risk with increasing complexity
  of procedure. SDCEP 2015 guidelines3 arbitrarily categorize any
  procedure involving a mucoperiosteal flap to be high risk, suggesting
  patients refrain from last dose and morning procedure. Use
  carboxymethyl cellulose packs and suture routinely. Recommence
  anticoagulation at next dose if it is 4h after surgery.
041



      410    Chapter 0     Surgical principles and oral surgery

            • Major surgery:
              • emergency—​consider using prothrombin complex concentrate and/​
                or recombinant factor VIIa with haematology advice;
              • elective—​consider early bridging with LMWH using local protocol.
                Recommence anticoagulation recommended after 48–​72h.4
            Aspirin/​clopidogrel/​prasugrel/​ticagrelor
            • Discontinue 5–​10 days before major surgery.
            • Continue for dentoalveolar surgery (carboxymethyl cellulose packs and
              suturing).
            Postoperative bleeding
            • Primary: immediate bleeding that occurs at the time of surgery.
            •	Reactionary occurs within 48h of surgery due to opening of small blood
              vessels, disturbance to a blood clot, or wearing off of the effect of a
              vasoconstrictor.
            • Secondary: occurs after 48h, often 1 week postoperatively. Usually
              result of an infection, which destroys the clot or damages blood vessels
              in the base of the wound.
            Medicine-​related osteonecrosis of the jaw
            • Antiresorptives ± anti-​angiogenics.
            • Antiresorptive—​bisphosphonates:
              • potent inhibitors of osteoclastic activity and tightly bound to mineral
                in the bone matrix—​increasing usage in medicine;
              • used orally to treat and prevent osteoporosis (alendronate);
              • used IV (pamidronate, zoledronate) in hypercalcaemia, secondary to:
                 bony metastases, e.g. breast cancer;
                 myeloma;
                 Paget’s disease.
              • considered to have slow offset of action—​effects last ?decades;
              • bisphosphonate-​related osteonecrosis of the jaws (BRONJ) first
                described in 2003;
              • at present, the serum C-​telopeptide cross-​link of type 1 collagen
                (sCTX) blood test not considered helpful in the identification of
                patients at risk of medicine-​related osteonecrosis of the jaw (MRONJ).
            • Antiresorptive—​biological—​denosumab:
              • highly specific RANK ligand inhibitor—​inhibits osteoclast formation,
                function and survival in an extracellular milieu;
              • used as IV infusion with half-​life of 26 days;
              • effective osteoclastic action returns in 9 months of stopping the drug.
            • Antiangiogenic:
              • VEGF inhibitors—​bevacizumab, aflibercept;
              • tyrosine kinase inhibitor—​sunitinib:
                 used in cancer treatment to restrict tumour vascularization;
                	i potential for MRONJ when used in combination with
                   antiresorptive in treatment of malignancy—​risk up to 2.9%.
            • Overall incidence of MRONJ5,6
              • antiresorptive in non-​malignancy = 0.01–​0.15%.
              • antiresorptive in malignancy = 1%.
              • risk i with concurrent glucocorticoids, i age, previous MRONJ, dose
                and duration of bisphosphonates, smoking, chemotherapy, or surgery.
         Management of the medically compromised patient                        411


MRONJ presents
• As non-​healing socket with exposed bone or sequestra.
• Usually due to extractions, but can be spontaneous/​due to denture
  trauma.
•	Rarely with pathological fracture.
• ♀ > ♂.
• Mandible > maxilla. 73%:23%—​both jaws 4%.
• Stage 1: asymptomatic bone exposure/​necrosis.
• Stage 2: symptomatic bone exposure/​necrosis.
• Stage 3: as for stage 2, but includes extraoral sinus/​pathological
  fracture/​osteolysis to lower border.
Prevention
•	Ensuring dental health before starting therapy—​referral from GMP or
  oncologist to GDP.
• Avoidance of extractions once on bisphosphonates.
•	Regular dental care.
• No evidence that stopping bisphosphonates decreases risk or aids
  management of MRONJ.
• If extractions are required, ADA and SDCEP do not recommend
  perioperative prophylactic antibiotics, although it is commonly
  employed.
Management of MRONJ
• Should be conservative—​further intervention risks further necrosis.
• Any debridement should be minimal.
• Biopsy may be necessary to rule out malignancy—​submit tissue for
  microbiology also.
• Antibiotics if symptomatic, guided by C&S.
• Progression of necrosis is frequent and may result in pathological
  fracture—​mandibular resection ± reconstruction may be indicated.
• Stage 1: conservative + improve oral hygiene.
• Stage 2: as stage 1 + systemic antibiotics ± surgical debridement.
• Stage 3: as stage 2 + debridement + resection ± reconstruction.
Osteoradionecrosis
Definition
Osteoradionecrosis (ORN) is a condition of non-​vital bone in a site of radi-
ation injury in the absence of neoplastic disease characterized by:
•	Theory 1 (Marx, 1983),7 hypovascularity. Hypocellularity, hypoxia.
•	Theory 2 (Delanian and Lefaix, 2004),8 fibroatrophic theory.
± Injury l three grades of disease:
• Grade I: most common, exposed alveolar bone.
• Grade II: ORN that does not respond to hyperbaric oxygen (HBO)
   therapy and requires sequestrectomy/​saucerization.
• Grade III: demonstrated by full-​thickness involvement and/​or
   pathological fracture.
Controversies in the definition of ORN include duration plus presence and
extent of both bone and the soft tissue involvement.
241



      412    Chapter 0      Surgical principles and oral surgery

            Cause
            •	Rare in patients who receive <60Gy radiation therapy.
            • Incidence d over the last three decades.
            • Incidence is i in patients who receive combined chemoradiation.
            • ?Genetic predisposition—​specific allelotype in the TGFB1 gene.
            • Injury:
              • none;
              • tooth extraction;
              • related cancer surgery;
              • biopsy;
              • denture irritation;
              • exposure of the irradiated bone under soft tissue necrosis;
              • implant placement (success in irradiated bone 60% vs 95% in
                 non-​irradiated).
            Patient-​associated risk factors
            • Immunodeficiency.
            • Malnutrition.
            • Peripheral vascular disease.
            • Alcohol and tobacco misuse.
            • Size and site of the tumour.
            • Xerostomia.
            • Neglected dentition with poor oral hygiene.
            Radiotherapy-​associated risk factors
            •	Radiation field size.
            • Photon energy.
            • Brachytherapy.
            • Fractionation.
            Clinical symptoms/​signs
            • Pain.
            • Swelling.
            •	Trismus.
            •	Exposed bone.
            • Pathological fracture.
            • Malocclusion.
            • Oro-​cutaneous fistula.
            Prevention
            • Dental assessment and extractions before cancer surgery, and at least 2
              weeks before RT.
            •	Head and neck cancer MDT should have restorative dentist as a core
              member.
            • Maintenance of dental health post treatment of patients who have had
              RT to the jaws.
            •	Extractions after RT—​wait until mucositis has subsided.
            • ORN risk is greater beyond 18 months after finishing RT.
            • Mandible > maxilla.
            Management of the medically compromised patient                                                 413


• Suggested ways to reduce risk of ORN in extractions in irradiated bone:
  • preoperative HBO?-​the 2019 HOPON trial showed no significant
    benefit.
  • avoid LA with adrenaline;
  • atraumatic technique;
  • antibiotic prophylaxis;
  • ?perioperative pentoxifylline ± tocopherol.

Management of ORN
• Oral hygiene/​chlorhexidine.
• Antibiotics guided by C&S.
• Minimal intervention/​sequestrectomy.
• Vascularized free tissue transfer in stage III disease:
  • composite flap to replace irradiated bone and mucosa;
  • higher flap failure and complications than non-​irradiated recipient site.
•	HBO in ORN remains controversial. Marx7 reported high success with
  HBO in treating established ORN (Marx protocols), but these results
  have not been reproduced in subsequent studies or in Cochrane
  reviews.
• Studies of pentoxifylline and tocopherol (vitamin E) with clodronate
  have been published.
• A Cochrane review in 2019 stated: ‘Given the suboptimal reporting and
  inadequate sample sizes of the included studies, evidence regarding the
  interventions evaluated by the trials included in this review is uncertain.
  More well-​designed RCTs with larger samples are required to make
  conclusive statements regarding the efficacy of these interventions.’9
References
1. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) (2008, updated 2016). Prophylaxis
   against infective endocarditis: antimicrobial prophylaxis against infective endocarditis in adults and
   children undergoing interventional procedures. M https://​www.nice.org.uk/​guidance/​cg64
2. Scottish Dental Clinical Effectiveness Programme (SDCEP) (2017). Antibiotic prophylaxis against
   infective endocarditis implementation advice. M http://​www.sdcep.org.uk/​published-​guidance/​
   antibiotic-​prophylaxis/​
3. Scottish Dental Clinical Effectiveness Programme (SDCEP) (2015). Management of dental pa-
   tients taking anticoagulants or antiplatelet drugs. M http://​www.sdcep.org.uk/​wp-​content/​up-
   loads/​2015/​09/​Full-​Guidance-​cover-​copy.jpg
4. Jethwa, A.R., Khariwala, S.S. (2018). When should therapeutic anticoagulation be restarted fol-
   lowing major head and neck surgery? Laryngoscope 128(5): 1025–​6.
5.	Ruggiero, S.L., Dodson, T.B., Fantasia, J., Goodday, R., Aghaloo, T., Mehrotra, B., et al. (2014).
   American Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons position paper on medication-​related
   osteonecrosis of the jaw—​2014 update. J Oral Maxillofac Surg 72(10): 1938–​56.
6. Scottish Dental Clinical Effectiveness Programme (SDCEP) (2017). Oral health management of
   patients at risk of medication-​related osteonecrosis of the jaw. M http://​www.sdcep.org.uk/​
   published-​guidance/​medication-​related-​osteonecrosis-​of-​the-​jaw/​
7. Marx, R.E. (1983). A new concept in the treatment of osteoradionecrosis. J Oral Maxillofac Surg
   41(6): 351–​7.
8. Delanian, S., Lefaix, J.L. (2004). The radiation-​induced fibroatrophic process: therapeutic perspec-
   tive via the antioxidant pathway. Radiother Oncol 73(2): 119–​31.
9.	El-​Rabbany, M., Duchnay, M., Raziee, H.R., Zych, M., Tenenbaum, H., Shah, P.S., et al. (2019).
   Interventions for preventing osteoradionecrosis of the jaws in adults receiving head and neck
   radiotherapy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 11: CD011559.
41



     414    Chapter 0      Surgical principles and oral surgery


           Dentoalveolar surgery
           Intra oral surgery involving drilling, is an aerosol generating procedure, and
           precautions against Covid 19 should be used where appropriate.
           Third molars/​impacted wisdom teeth
           • Commonest missing tooth—​25% of all third molars missing.
           •	Eruption average age 16–​25 years.
           • May remain unerupted.
           • Commonly become impacted.
           • Impaction—​soft tissue only or bony.
           • Bony impaction:
             • vertical 38%;
             • mesioangular 44%;
             • distoangular 6%;
             • horizontal 3%.
           • Still in top 15 NHS UK surgical procedures.
           Removal of symptomatic wisdom teeth (see NICE guidance, % NICE
           guidelines regarding wisdom teeth (2000), p. 417) is justified, with benefits
           outweighing risks of removal. No RCTs compare the long-​term outcome of
           early removal with retention of pathology-​free third molars.
           Possible consequences of retention
           •	Removal when older with i surgical and general complications.
           • Dentigerous cyst formation (rare).
           • Caries in distal aspect of second molar.
           • No evidence of association with lower incisor crowding.
           Possible consequences of removal
           • Nerve damage lingual/​ID.
           • Dry socket (3–​35%).
           • Infection.
           • Bleeding.
           • Swelling.
           •	Trismus.
           •	Rarely iatrogenic # of mandible.
           • Oro-​antral fistula.
           • Displacement of upper third molar into maxillary sinus or infratemporal fossa.
           • Displacement of lower third molar into sublingual or submandibular space.
           • Damage to second molar restoration.
           •	TMJDS.
           Controversies in wisdom tooth removal techniques
           • Flap design: triangular, envelope.
           • Lingual flap retraction ± nerve protection.
           • Bone removal:
             • site: buccal approach vs lingual split;
             • method: drill vs chisels.
           •	Tooth division: drill vs osteotome.
           • LA vs GA: bilateral lower wisdom tooth removal under LA has been
             shown to be a safe technique.
                                              Dentoalveolar surgery             415


A Cochrane review in 20141 looked at the evidence for different surgical
methods of removing wisdom teeth. Despite much well-​known work in
the field of lingual nerve injury following wisdom tooth removal, there is no
good-​quality evidence to support the practice or not of retraction. Some
studies have shown a higher incidence of lingual nerve damage (up to 9.1%)
when a retractor is used, but there is some suggestion that this is operator
dependent. In skilled hands, careful lingual nerve protection when the re-
tractor has been correctly inserted puts the nerve at less risk from bur/​
chisel trauma.
Lingual nerve damage
• Incidence varies widely between studies: 0–​22%.
• Permanent disturbance 0–​2%.
• Causes:
   • flap design;
   • damage by retractor;
   • damage by bur/​chisel;
   • during suturing.

ID nerve damage
•	Temporary up to 5% (more related to anatomy). One RCT
  demonstrated up to 19% incidence in high-​risk cases where
  coronectomy may have been indicated.
• Permanent 0.35–​8.4%.
Nerve damage in wisdom tooth removal
Seddon’s classification of nerve injury:
• Neuropraxia: physiological disruption, but anatomy intact.
• Axonotmesis: axons disrupted, epi-​and perineurium preserved.
• Neurotmesis: severed nerve.
In theory, neurotmesis has a greater chance of recovery if the severance has
occurred in a bony canal, rather than in soft tissue (ID vs lingual).
   After peripheral nerve injury, proximal axons suffer retrograde degener-
ation, which may extend as far as the cell body (trigeminal ganglion for ID
and lingual). The distal axonal segments undergo Wallerian degeneration
with loss of the myelin sheath. Axonal regrowth occurs at up to 2mm/​day.
Definitions of altered sensation
•	Hypoaesthesia: d sensation.
• Paraesthesia: altered sensation.
• Dysaesthesia: unpleasant sensation.
• Anaesthesia: no sensation.
Factors predictive of difficulty in wisdom teeth removal
Winter’s lines are described historically, but are rarely used in practice.
•	Type of impaction.
• Depth of application point.
• Density of bone (age, ethnicity).
• Surgical access (trismus, obesity).
•	Root morphology.
• Proximity to inferior dental bundle (IDB).
• Associated pathology.
641



      416    Chapter 0      Surgical principles and oral surgery

            Radiographic signs of close involvement with inferior dental bundle
            • Narrowing of canal.
            • Loss of lamina dura.
            • Change in direction of canal.
            • Darkening of the root apex.
            If involvement is suspected:
            • Consider tooth division.
            • Consider coronectomy.
            • CBCT scan with ALARP principles.
            Cone beam computed tomography
            • Used in implant therapy, endodontics, orthodontics, and oral surgery for
              diagnosis and treatment planning.
            • Also used in diagnosis and surgical planning of odontogenic cysts, benign
              and malignant tumours, inflammatory changes of bone, orthognathic
              surgery, maxillofacial trauma, ENT disorders, foreign bodies, craniofacial
              disorders, and soft tissue calcifications.
            • >50 models on the market, with variable exposure parameters (kVp,
              mAs, field of view size).
            • Benefits of 3D vs 2D images.
            • Concerns with overuse and increasing patient accumulated dose.
            • IRR and Ionising Radiation (Medical Exposure) Regulations 2017
              (IRMER) obligations + training (referrer, practitioner, operator).
            •	The entire CBCT image dataset must be reported.2
            • CBCT has higher spatial resolution and reduced radiation dose and
              artefacts when compared to conventional CT.
            • CBCT has limited contrast, field of view, and soft tissue contrast
              compared to conventional CT.
            •	Recent evidence-​based reviews show CBCT provides i visualization
              and enhances diagnostic capability but does not increase sensitivity and
              specificity when compared to plain panoramic radiographs in evaluating
              mandibular third molars. Alteration of treatment plan, outcomes, and
              prevention of complications remain undetermined.
            • CBCT provides statistically superior diagnostic imaging in cases of
              impacted maxillary canines, supernumeries and impacted maxillary
              third molars when compared to panoramic radiographs—​l changes in
              treatment plans for impacted maxillary canines.
            Coronectomy
            • Defined as partial odontectomy or deliberate vital root retention.
            • Aim is to remove crown below cementoenamel junction to remove all
              enamel.
            •	This allows bone integration and healing.
            • CBCT can avoid unnecessary coronectomy.
            • Predominantly used to minimize risk of injury to IDN.
            •	Recent systematic review demonstrates 61.7–​100% success.
            • Considered the suggested technique with high-​risk mandibular third
              molars with a vital pulp.
            • One systematic review demonstrated 2.3–​38.3% root mobilization,
              necessitating root removal.
                                           Dentoalveolar surgery             417


•	The same study showed 0–​4.9% reoperation due to persistent pain,
  root exposure or persistent apical infection.
•	Root migration reported from 2% to 85.3% —​consequences unknown.
• NHS Resolution (formerly The NHS Litigation Authority) has deemed
  coronectomy must be offered as an option in appropriate cases.
Indications
•	High risk for IDN injury.
•	Healthy patient.
• Vital pulp.
Contraindication
• Non-​vital pulp.
• Caries into pulp.
• Mobile mandibular third molars.
• Mandibular third molars associated with tumours.
• ?Horizontal mandibular third molars.
Risks of coronectomy
•	To IDN 0–​9.5%.
•	To lingual nerve 0–​2%.
• Further procedure to remove the roots 6.9%.
• Coronectomy vs extraction of mandibular third molars.
• All high-​risk mandibular third molars be assessed by CBCT.
•	This will not be appropriate where there are contraindications to
   coronectomy such as pulpal or apical pathology.
IDN injury
• If noted at time of surgery, immediate repair should be undertaken, but
  technically challenging.
• If noted at review, monitor with light touch perception/​sharp and blunt
  discrimination ± two point discrimination. If no improvement, consider
  referral to specialist unit.
Management of lingual nerve injuries following wisdom tooth removal
•	Recovery not guided by bony canal.
•	Heterogeny of fibre types vs IDB makes regeneration back to correct
  receptors less likely.
•	Exploration and repair indicated at 3 months if no recovery.
• Success variable: consider referral to specialist unit.
• Cochrane review (2014) found no evidence for any one intervention.1
NICE guidelines regarding wisdom teeth (2000)
Prophylactic removal of a wisdom tooth is no longer indicated.3 Removal
of wisdom teeth should be limited to patients with evidence of pathology:
• Severe or recurrent pericoronitis.
• Unrestorable caries/​distal caries in adjacent molar.
• Non-​treatable pulpal and/​or periapical pathology.
• Cellulitis.
841



      418    Chapter 0     Surgical principles and oral surgery

            • Abscess and osteomyelitis.
            • Internal/​external resorption of tooth/​adjacent teeth.
            • Fracture of tooth.
            • Disease of follicle including cyst/​tumour.
            •	Tooth/​teeth impeding surgery or reconstructive jaw surgery.
            •	Tooth involved in/​within field of tumour resection.
            In Scotland, the SIGN guidelines apply.
            Apicectomy and retrograde root filling
            Indications
            • Failure of orthograde approach where repeat endodontic therapy may
              be detrimental to tooth or cannot be repeated.
            • Post crown on tooth with apical pathology and a good coronal seal,
              where crown and post removal risks root fracture.
            • Inaccessible apical one-​third of root, e.g. calcification, curved, or
              open apex.
            •	Root perforation (often poor prognosis).
            • Fractured and symptomatic apical one-​third following trauma.
            • Apical pathology requiring biopsy or enucleation of cyst.
            Contraindications
            • Unrestorable tooth.
            • Periodontal disease/​perio-​endo lesion.
            • Furcation involvement.
            • Proximity to IDB.
            • IV bisphosphonate therapy.
            •	Extensive loss of coronal tooth tissue/​compromised coronal seal.
            Flap designs
            •	Edges should be on sound bone.
            •	Two-​or three-​sided gingival margin:
               • good access;
               • i recession around crown margins;
               • indicated in ?buccal post perforation;
               • more difficult to suture.
            • Luebke–​Oschenbein flap is three-​sided, but supragingival. Unwise in
               possible post perforation, but good access and easy to suture.
            • Semilunar flap gives reduced access, is less easy to suture, and no longer
               recommended.
            Points
            • Apical soft tissue should be sent for histology.
            • Apical radiolucency over 1cm likely to be radicular cyst, rather than
              apical granuloma (a collection of granulation tissue, not containing
              histological granulomata).
            • Apex removal resects the apical delta of canals and enables retrograde
              root filling to be placed.
            • Apicectomy should be close to 90° to reduce surface area of exposure
              of transected dentinal tubules.
            • At least 3mm of the root should be resected.
                                            Dentoalveolar surgery            419


•	Retrograde cavity preparation 3mm deep with parallel walls using
  ultrasonic tip and magnification is recommended by endodontists and
  supported by published meta-​analysis.
•	Retrograde materials:
  • mineral trioxide aggregate/​Portland cement;
  • super EBA;
  • glass ionomer;
  • composites for dentine;
  • intermediate restorative material—​ZnO/​eugenol based;
  • amalgam success rate low and introduces mercury into the tissues—​
     possible toxicity and therefore no longer recommended by the Royal
     College of Surgeons of England.
• Success rates vary in literature from 30% to 90% higher on upper
  anteriors and single-​rooted teeth.
• Success rates for repeat repair or pre-​existing loss of supporting bone
  low (<40%).
• Success rate have been shown up to 96.8% at 1 year and 91% at
  5–​7 years using strict microsurgical technique and mineral trioxide
  aggregate.
Dentoalveolar surgery for orthodontics
• Upper labial fraenectomy.
• Impacted canines.
•	Exposure of impacted/​unerupted teeth.
• Miniscrews for anchorage.
Upper labial fraenectomy
• No adequate RCTs exist comparing no intervention with surgery.
• An upper midline diastema is common in the mixed dentition and often
  closes with eruption of the permanent canines.
• Fewer carried out than in the past.
• Fraenectomy theoretically only of value in helping to close a midline
  diastema if traction on it produces movement of the incisive papilla.
•	Excision of the fraenum must include the fibres, which pass between the
  upper incisors.
• Some advocate a burr cut—​no studies support this and there is a risk of
  damage to the roots of the upper central incisors.
• Five techniques are described + laser/​electrosurgery—​none are
  considered superior.
Management options for impacted canines
(Royal College of Surgeons of England 2016 guidance.4)
• Keep deciduous canine and leave permanent in situ.
• Keep deciduous canine and remove permanent.
•	Remove deciduous and permanent canines, and close space/​place implant.
•	Expose and bond permanent canine. Consider retaining deciduous
  temporarily if permanent well displaced. May also require removal of
  adjacent first premolar.
•	Transplantation—​poor success rate.
• Decision regarding best option should be a result of discussions
  including patient (± parents) and orthodontist.
420



      420    Chapter 0          Surgical principles and oral surgery

            Exposure of impacted/​unerupted teeth
            • Aim to remove bone/​mucosa preventing eruption, and enable
              orthodontic bonding and traction to align the tooth.
            • Commonly upper canine teeth, occasionally upper incisors (often
              following previous supernumerary removal or trauma), lower
              premolars.
            • Association between ectopic teeth and missing teeth.
            • If canines are not buccally palpable at age 10, consider palatal position
              or referral to an orthodontist for location.
            •	Extraction of deciduous canines at age of 10 years will allow
              spontaneous alignment of 75% of ectopic permanent canines.
            Procedure
            • Palatal canines:
              • exposed using a palatal flap (usually under GA);
              • judicious bone removal to expose tip and maximum convexity
                 of crown;
              • options:
              • closed exposure—​bonding a bracket and chain + re-​covering;
              • open exposure—​excision of overlying palatal mucosa + Whitehead’s
                 varnish pack dressing or cover plate;
              • Cochrane review 20175: no evidence to support one surgical
                 technique over another.
            • Buccal teeth: exposure with an apically repositioned flap ± bonding of
              bracket at surgery—​maintains good gingival architecture and aesthetics
              for the final tooth position.
            Miniscrews/​plates
            • Provide bony anchorage.
            • Increasingly popular.
            • NICE guidance advises use should be audited.
            References
            1. Coulthard, P., Bailey, E., Esposito, M., Furness, S., Renton, T.F., Worthington, H.V. (2014).
               Surgical techniques for the removal of mandibular wisdom teeth. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
               7: CD004345.
            2. SEDENTEXCT Project (2012). Cone beam CT for dental and maxillofacial radiology. Radiation
               Protection No. 172. European Commission. M http://​www.sedentexct.eu/​files/​radiation_​pro-
               tection_​172.pdf
            3. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) (2000). Guidance on the extraction of
               wisdom teeth. Technology appraisal guidance [TA1]. M https://​www.nice.org.uk/​guidance/​ta1
            4.	Husain, J., Burden, D., McSherry, P. (2016). Management of the palatally ectopic maxillary canine.
               M https://​www.rcseng.ac.uk/​-​/​media/​files/​rcs/​fds/​publications/​canine-​guideline-​2016.pdf
            5. Parkin, N., Benson, P.E., Thind, B., Shah, A., Khalil, I., Ghafoor, S. (2017). Open versus closed
               surgical exposure of canine teeth that are displaced in the roof of the mouth. Cochrane Database
               Syst Rev 8: CD006966.
Dentoalveolar surgery   421
42



     422    Chapter 0     Surgical principles and oral surgery


           Odontogenic infections
           • Infections associated with teeth.
           • Definitive treatment is drainage of the infection/​pus and/​or removal of
             the offending tooth/​pulp.
           • Infections are bacterial—​arising from necrotic pulp, pericoronitis, and
             periodontal pockets.
           Severe infections
           • Can be life-​threatening emergencies as they spread into the potential
             fascial spaces within the head and neck.
           • Can track into the cavernous sinus or mediastinum.
           • Pus in the potential spaces in the head and neck is a serious hazard to
             the airway and requires urgent management.
           • Severity depends upon:
             • local anatomy;
             • virulence of the organisms;
             • host resistance.

           Microbiology
           • Mixed infection: Bacteroides (anaerobic) and Streptococcus (aerobic and
             anaerobic).
           • Usually sensitive to penicillins—​resistance to phenoxymethylpenicillin or
             benzylpenicillin is increasing among oral anaerobes.
           •	Resistance rare.
           Fascial tissue spaces
           These are potential spaces between tissue planes that can fill up with pus—​
           the opening of planes aided by enzymatic tissue lysis caused by pathogenic
           bacteria.
           • Buccal space:
             • commonest space to be affected by a dental abscess, both from upper
                and lower teeth;
             • bounded by buccinator attachment;
             • contains the buccal fat pad;
             • can usually be drained intraorally.
           • Masticator space:
             • involved in molar teeth abscesses, lower more than upper;
             • bounded by muscles of mastication.
           • Deep masticator space:
             • lies between the pterygoid muscles and mandibular ramus;
             • superficial masticator space lies laterally to the ramus and comprises
                the submasseteric space below the superficial temporal space;
             • infection gaining access to the pterygoid space can potentially spread
                intracranially;
             • deep masticator space gives access to the parapharyngeal space that,
                in turn, contains the carotid sheath giving potential access for pus to
                track to the mediastinum.
           • Parotid space lies within the parotid fascia.
                                              Odontogenic infections                  423


• Sublingual space:
  • lies between the floor of the mouth and mylohyoid muscle;
  • communicates around its free posterior edge with the submandibular
    space in the neck.
• Ludwig’s angina is defined as bilateral cellulitis of the submandibular and
  sublingual spaces.
• Canine fossa:
  • bound by the perioral muscles of facial expression;
  • infection can spread via the ophthalmic veins to the intracranial
    circulation.
Diagnosis
• Severe pain.
• Swelling.
• Discharge.
• Swinging pyrexia.
•	Tachycardia.
•	Raised white cell count.
• Later:
  • drooling;
  • difficulty breathing or speaking;
  • severe trismus;
  • stridor (inspiratory wheeze).
• Death by sepsis/​respiratory arrest/​intracranial or intrathoracic complications.
Treatment
• Involve senior anaesthetic help early.
• Fibreoptic intubation and/​or a surgical airway may be indicated.
• Urgent incision, drainage, and exploration of fascial spaces, multiple
  drain insertion + extraction of offending tooth.
•	High-​dose antibiotics (triple therapy—​amoxicillin/​gentamicin/​
  metronidazole) ± steroids.
•	There is no RCT evidence to determine the role of steroids in
  odontogenic infection. They have been shown to decrease length of
  stay in the ENT treatment of quinsy.
• Mortality of Ludwig’s angina is 5–​8%.
Necrotizing fasciitis
•	Rare.
•	High mortality.
• Polymicrobial Streptococcus/​Staphylococcus/​Bacteroides/​Clostridia.
• Monomicrobial: group A streptococci or MRSA.
• Usually occurs in the immunocompromised.
•	Treatment is wide surgical debridement and IV antibiotics.
• A 2018 systematic review of necrotizing fasciitis of odontogenic origin
  resulted in a 9.8% mortality rate.
Osteomyelitis
•	Rare—​acute or chronic.
• Secondary to immunosuppression/​diabetes in developed world.
• Common in developing world secondary to odontogenic infection/​fracture.
42



     424    Chapter 0     Surgical principles and oral surgery

           Microbiology
           • Bacteroides spp.
           • Staphylococcus aureus.
           • Klebsiella.
           • Proteus.
           Signs/​symptoms
           • Pain.
           •	Trismus.
           •	Tooth mobility.
           • Mental nerve paraesthesia.
           • Pyrexia.
           • Necrosis of bone l sequestration.
           Investigation
           • Pulpal vitality.
           •	Radiography: moth-​eaten bone, subperiosteal bone deposition.
           • Pus for C&S.
           • Management:
              • removal of non-​vital teeth;
              • penicillin/​metronidazole or clindamycin with microbiological advice;
              • removal of sequestra;
              • submission of tissue for microbiology and histology.

           Other odontogenic infections
           Apical dental abscess
           Secondary to pulp necrosis.
           Pericoronitis
           Acute inflammation ± pus formation around the crown of a tooth.
           Periodontal abscess
           Arises in a periodontal pocket.
           Dry socket
           • 0.5–​5% of routine extractions—​up to 37.5% in mandibular molars.
           • Localized osteitis (bony inflammation) after extraction. Associated with:
             • smoking;
             • difficult extraction (more common in mandible);
             • OCP;
             • vasoconstrictors of LA.
           • Prophylactic preoperative antibiotics have been shown in some studies
             to reduce the incidence of dry socket in third molar surgery.
           • A 2012 Cochrane review1 demonstrated insufficient evidence to determine
             the effects of ten preventative interventions and insufficient evidence to
             determine the effects of any of the interventions to treat dry socket.
           Sepsis
           (NICE 2016 guidelines.2)
           • Inflammatory immune response triggered by an infection resulting in
             injury to host tissues and organs.
           •	Risk factors include extremes of age, immunocompromise, malignancy,
             diabetes mellitus, and polytrauma or major burns.
                                            Odontogenic infections                 425


• Medical imaging should be used to look for the possible location of infection.
• Cause—​Gram +ve bacteria, staphylococci, Streptococcus pyogenes,
  Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Klebsiella.
• Differential diagnosis—​anaphylaxis, adrenal insufficiency, hypovolaemia,
  heart failure, and PE.
• Symptoms present differently between adults and children.
Red flag signs
•	Responds only to voice or pain/​unresponsive.
• Acute confusional state.
• Systolic BP ≤90mmHg (or drop >40mmHg from normal).
•	Heart rate >130 per minute.
•	Respiratory rate ≥25 per minute.
• Needs oxygen to keep SpO2 ≥92%.
• Non-​blanching rash, mottled/​ashen/​cyanotic.
• Not passed urine in last 18h/​urinary output <0.5mL/​kg/​h.
• Lactate ≥2mmol/​L.
•	Recent chemotherapy.
Adult presentation
• Pyrexia.
•	Hypothermia.
•	Tachypnoea.
•	Tachycardia.
• Confusion.
• Oedema.
•	Hyperglycaemia.
• Dysuria.
• Metabolic acidosis.
•	Respiratory alkalosis.
•	Hypotension.
Child presentation
• Breathing very fast.
•	Has a ‘fit’ or convulsion.
• Looks mottled, bluish, or pale.
•	Has a rash that does not fade when you press it.
• Is very lethargic or difficult to wake.
• Feels abnormally cold to touch.
Children under 5 years may present
• Not feeding.
• Vomiting repeatedly.
•	Has not passed urine for 12h.
Treatment: complete all within 1h:
• O2 —​to maintain saturations >94%.
•	Take blood cultures/​CSF/​urine for analysis/​sputum/​CXR.
• IV antibiotics along local protocol.
• IV fluids—​500mL bolus if hypotensive/​lactate >2mmol/​L.
• Check serial lactates + corroborate high venous blood gas lactate with
  arterial sample.
• Urine output—​may require urinary catheter.
426



      426    Chapter 0           Surgical principles and oral surgery

            If patient still has
            • Systolic BP <90 mmHg;
            •	Reduced level of consciousness despite resuscitation;
            •	Respiratory rate >25 breaths per minute;
            • Lactate not reducing;
            Consider contacting critical care outreach team.
            • A regional UK study showed no significant change in the causative
               bacteria of odontogenic infection over the last 30–​40 years—​
               microscopy and C&S showed 84% sensitivity to amoxicillin and
               metronidazole.3
            • A Scottish study demonstrated 86% of acute infection presentation was
               odontogenic in origin and 32% displayed at least one sign of sepsis.4
            • A 2006 UK audit reported 266 cervicofacial infection of dental origin
               in a 1-​month period. Three required ITU and one required surgical
               tracheostomy.5
            References
            1. Daly, B., Sharif, M.O., Newton, T., Jones, K., Worthington, H.V. (2012). Local interventions for the
               management of alveolar osteitis (dry socket). Cochrane Database Syst Rev 12: CD006968.
            2. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) (2016, updated 2017). Sepsis: recog-
               nition, diagnosis and early management. NICE guideline [NG51]. M https://​www.nice.org.uk/​
               guidance/​ng51
            3. Farmahan, S., Tuopar, D., Ameerally, P.J., Kotecha, R., Sisodia, B. (2014). Microbiological examin-
               ation and antibiotic sensitivity of infections in the head and neck. Has anything changed? Br J Oral
               Maxillofac Surg 52(7): 632–​5.
            4. Byers, J., Lowe, T., Goodall, C.A. (2012). Acute cervico-​facial infection in Scotland 2010: patterns
               of presentation, patient demographics and recording of systemic involvement. Br J Oral Maxillofac
               Surg 50(7): 626–​30.
            5. Carter, L.M., Layton, S. (2009). Cervicofacial infection of dental origin presenting to maxillofacial
               surgery units in the United Kingdom: a national audit. Br Dent J 206(2): 73–​8.
Odontogenic infections   427
428



      428       Chapter 0   Surgical principles and oral surgery


            Non-​odontogenic infections
            Actinomycosis
            • Persistent low-​grade infection associated with multiple cutaneous
              sinuses.
            • Actinomyces israelii and others/​commensals in tonsil.
            • Cervicofacial infection follows extraction or fracture.
            •	Treatment: drainage and long-​term penicillin V (at least 6 weeks).
            Cat scratch disease
            • Common cause of cervical lymphadenopathy in children.
            • Causative organism Bartonella henselae.
            • Diagnosis—​antibodies to Bartonella.
            •	Histology of an excised lymph node shows granulomas, but is not
              pathognomonic.
            •	Treatment is symptomatic.
            Staphylococcal lymphadenitis
            •   Seen mainly in children following minor breach in skin or mucosa.
            •   May result from nose picking.
            •   Flucloxacillin is antibiotic of choice.
            •   Suppurative lymphadenitis may need drainage of pus.
            Mycobacterial lymphadenitis
            •	Typical or atypical: former is rare in the UK except among immigrant
              populations.
            • Presentation: lymphadenitis ± suppuration.
            • Diagnosis: acid-​fast bacilli may be seen on Ziehl–​Neelsen staining.
              Culture may be needed for up to 12 weeks.
            •	Treatment:
              • surgical debridement;
              • typical TB—​antituberculous therapy;
              • atypical mycobacterial lymphadenitis—​clarithromycin;
              • involve the paediatric team in definitive management.
                                                                   Biopsy       429


Biopsy
A biopsy is a sample of tissue taken from a patient for histopathological
examination to provide a diagnosis.
Types
• Incisional: removes a sample of the lesion for diagnosis:
  • needle (FNA for cytology, core biopsy, or Tru-​Cut);
  • punch biopsy;
  • scalpel.
• Excisional: removes whole lesion.
Lesions warranting biopsy
• All excised lesions should be submitted for histological evaluation.
• Soft tissue lesions, which cannot be accurately diagnosed clinically,
  should warrant biopsy, particularly white and red patches.
• Frozen sections: see |Chapter 2 P228 and P229.
• Specimens should be covered in 10× their volume of 10% formalin.
• Fresh tissue may need to be submitted to discuss with pathologists.
•	Tissue may need to be sent for microbiological analysis/​culture, e.g. TB.
•	Tissue for immunofluorescence (vesiculobullous) disorders can be
  transported in normal saline, Michel’s solution, frozen section substitute,
  or liquid nitrogen. Discuss with laboratory.
Sentinel node biopsy
See % Sentinel node biopsy, p. 87.
430



      430    Chapter 0     Surgical principles and oral surgery


            Cysts
            Definition
            Cysts are pathological cavities that are usually lined by epithelium and con-
            tain fluid. Most jaw cysts arise from odontogenic epithelium and grow by
            a variety of mechanisms, e.g. inflammation causing epithelial proliferation,
            bone resorption secondary to pressure/​prostaglandins, and alterations in
            cystic osmotic pressure.
            Odontogenic cysts
            Diagnosis
            • Often present as asymptomatic radiolucencies.
            • May present with infection/​pathological fracture.
            • Vitality testing of associated teeth.
            • Aspiration of the cyst contents is sometimes useful and can differentiate
              a maxillary cyst from the maxillary sinus.
            Treatment options
            • Observation may be appropriate, e.g. following endodontic therapy or,
              in an older patient, with an asymptomatic static radiolucency.
            •	Enucleation of the cyst together with any associated pathology and
              primary closure—​perioperative antibiotics will reduce the chance of the
              bony blood-​filled cavity becoming infected and, thus, allow organization
              of the clot to bone.
            •	Enucleation and packing with, e.g. Whitehead’s varnish pack (condemns
              the patient to pack changes and rarely indicated).
            • Marsupialization:
              • opening and biopsy of cyst and suturing of lining to oral mucosa;
              • healing is slow;
              • can be useful in children to enable tooth eruption or when GA for
                 enucleation is contraindicated.
            Radicular dental cysts
            • Secondary to a necrosis of pulp.
            • Described as a residual cyst if left following tooth removal.
            • Derived from epithelial cell rests of Malassez, which are stimulated to
              proliferate in an infected periapical granuloma.
            • Straw-​coloured fluid containing cholesterol crystals with protein content
              >5g/​dL.
            •	Treatment = orthograde endodontic treatment—​small (<1cm) radicular
              cysts may heal spontaneously.
            •	Enucleation ± apicectomy/​orthograde endodontic treatment/​
              extraction.
            Dentigerous cysts
            • Form around crown of unerupted permanent teeth (usually wisdom
              teeth or canines).
            • Arise from reduced enamel epithelium.
            •	Treatment: enucleation or marsupialization ± removal of the
              unerupted tooth.
                                                                     Cysts      431


Odontogenic keratocyst
•	Renamed in WHO 2017 classification as odontogenic keratocyst
  (previously keratocystic odontogenic tumour).
• Commonest site—​angle of the mandible.
•	Radiographically usually multilocular.
• 40% in a ‘dentigerous’ position.
• Lined by ortho-​(10%) or parakeratinized (83%) epithelium (7% have
  both)—​fluid has protein content <4g/​dL.
• Aspiration may be helpful for protein content (biochemistry) and
  keratinization (cytology).
•	Histologically high mitotic activity: growth is neoplastic with invasion of
  the medulla and not by bony expansion.
•	Treatment = enucleation ± Carnoy’s solution (decreases recurrence).
• Satellite cysts or daughter cysts increase the likelihood of recurrence, as
  does an association with Gorlin–​Goltz syndrome.
• Orthokeratinizing keratocysts are much less aggressive. Review for
  recurrence (up to 60%) particularly in Gorlin–​Goltz syndrome.
Gorlin–​Golz syndrome
(See % Basal cell carcinoma, p. 152.)
•	Rare.
• Autosomal dominant.
• Multiple BCC lesions on the skin aggressive, should not treated with RT
  (poor response rate, predisposes to new lesions).
• Palmar pits.
• Keratinizing odontogenic cysts in the jaws.
• Fused or bifid ribs.
• Calcification of the falx cerebri.
• Cataracts.
Calcifying odontogenic cysts
•	Rare.
• Areas of calcification and ‘ghost cells’ on histology.
•	Treatment = enucleation.
Stafne bone cyst
• Not a true cyst, but a developmental inclusion of salivary tissue in the
  mandible.
• Usually incidental finding on X-​ray (radiolucency below the ID canal).
• Well corticated.
• Sialography via the submandibular duct is diagnostic.
Aneurysmal bone cysts
• Slowly expand.
• Vascular bone.
• No epithelial lining.
• Symptomless, unless traumatized.
• Soap bubble appearance on X-​ray.
•	Treatment = enucleation.
•	Excision is usually curative.
432



      432    Chapter 0     Surgical principles and oral surgery

            Solitary bone cysts (traumatic bone cysts)
            •	Have no epithelial lining.
            • Usually found as an incidental finding on X-​ray.
            • Found above ID canal in body of mandible.
            • Characterized by a scalloped upper border passing up between the
              teeth roots.
            • Commonest in young men.
            •	Treatment = enucleation/​curettage (probably heal spontaneously on
              simply opening the cavity to confirm the diagnosis).
            Non-​odontogenic cysts
            (The only non-​odontogenic cyst included in the 2017 classification is the
            incisive canal cyst.)
            Fissural cysts
            • Arise from embryonic junctional epithelium at sites of embryological
               fusions.
            •	Rare in the mouth, e.g. incisive canal or nasopalatine cysts (heart-​shaped
               radiolucency in premaxilla >6mm in diameter), incisive papilla cysts, and
               nasolabial cysts (arise in soft tissue).
            •	Treatment = enucleation.
Cysts   433
43



     434    Chapter 0     Surgical principles and oral surgery


           Intraoral benign tumours
           Odontogenic tumours
           Only the commonest will be discussed.
           Odontomas
           • Malformations of dental hard tissue.
           • Not true neoplasms but hamartomas.
           • Compound odontomas have multiple primitive small teeth in
             fibrous sac.
           • Complex odontomas are an irregular (disorganized) mass of dental hard
             tissue.
           Cementomas
           • Part of the spectrum of cemento-​osseous dysplasias.
           •	Three types:
             • periapical cemental dysplasia (common in those of African origin);
             • focal cemento-​osseous dysplasia (Caucasians);
             • florid cemento-​osseous dysplasia (common in those of African
               origin).
           Ameloblastoma
           • Arises in primitive ectoderm involved in odontogenesis.
           • Locally invasive.
           • Commonest in posterior mandible (75% in ascending ramus), in ♂ and
             those of African origin.
           • Can become huge if neglected.
           •	Three clinical variants:
             • unicystic is the least aggressive type and expands into the surrounding
                bone. Radiographically it is unilocular and may be mistaken for an
                odontogenic cyst;
             • ameloblastoma: multiloculated appearance on X-​ray, resorption of
                teeth roots;
             • extraosseous/​peripheral: occurring in soft tissue.
           •	Histologically, two main types:
             • plexiform (cord-​like structures);
             • follicular (columnar ameloblast-​like cells).
           •	Treatment:
             • unicystic—​conservative/​enucleation (mural type treated as
                ameloblastoma);
             • ameloblastoma—​excision with a margin ± reconstruction.
           •	Recurrence after enucleation >50%.
           • Careful follow-​up required; recurrent ameloblastoma, which escapes to
             the skull base is potentially fatal.
           • Malignant ameloblastoma:
             • rare;
             • well-​differentiated/​benign histology, but metastasis usually to lung
                (theory of inhalation).
           • Ameloblastic carcinoma is described in the literature as showing
             histologically malignant features a malignant neoplasm.
                                         Intraoral benign tumours               435


Adenoameloblastoma/​adenomatoid odontogenic tumour
• Anterior maxilla in ♀.
• Often associated with an unerupted tooth.
•	Radiographically resembles a dentigerous cyst, which extends beyond
  the amelocemental junction and may show flecks of calcification.
•	Treatment = excision, recurrence is rare.
Calcifying epithelial otodontogenic tumour (Pindborg tumour)
•	Rare.
• X-​ray shows a radiolucency with scattered opacities.
•	Treatment = excision with margin. Recurrence 10–​15%.
Odontogenic myxoma
• Odontogenic mesenchyme origin.
• Affects the bone of young adults and can invade extensively.
• Multilocular radiolucency.
•	Histologically, ‘myxoid tissue’ is cell poor and rich in mucopolysaccharide
  with spindle cells.
•	Treatment = excision with margin.
Ameloblastic fibroma
• Very rare, seen in teenagers.
• Painless expansion.
• Unilocular radiolucency on X-​ray, often in posterior mandible.
•	Treatment = enucleation.
•	Recurrence up to 15%.
• Sarcomatous change of fibrous tissue is a rare complication.
• New but rare: primordial tumour.
Non-​odontogenic tumours
• Epithelial: SCC ?secondary to HPV infection.
• Connective tissue:
  • fibroma;
  • lipoma;
  • osteoma (can be associated with Gardener syndrome).
• Neurofibroma:
  • rare tumour of fibroblasts affecting a peripheral nerve;
  • tongue most often site affected;
  • may be associated with von Recklinghausen syndrome.
• Granular cell myoblastoma:
  • rare;
  • originates from histiocytes;
  • arises as nodule often on tongue;
  • excision is curative.
• Ossifying fibroma:
  • clearly defined fibro-​osseous lesion of the jaws;
  • presents as a painless, slow-​g rowing swelling;
  • can expand buccal and lingual plates;
  • radiolucent area surrounded by radio-​opaque margin on X-​ray;
  • histology similar to fibrous dysplasia.
436



      436    Chapter 0    Surgical principles and oral surgery


            Bone disorders: neoplastic
            Malignant tumours of the facial bones
            Primary: rare
            • osteosarcoma—​less aggressive and metastasize considerably less
               frequently than those of the extragnathic skeleton;
            • multiple myeloma;
            • primary intraosseous carcinoma;
            • sclerosing odontogenic carcinoma?
            Secondary
            • By local extension, e.g. SCC of floor of mouth, malignancy of the
              paranasal sinuses (SCC > adenocarcinoma > adenoid cystic carcinoma);
            • Metastasis from distant site—​breast, lung, thyroid, kidney, prostate.
                                      Bone disorders: non-neoplastic                      437


Bone disorders: non-​neoplastic
Fibrous dysplasia
• Monostotic (one bone affected).
• Polyostotic (multiple bones affected).
• Albrights syndrome (polyostotic fibrous dysplasia with skin pigmentation
  and precocious puberty).
• Presentation in adolescents and young adults with painless, rounded
  bony swelling in maxilla, which can disturb occlusion or function.
• X-​ray initially radiolucent lesions, eventually radio-​opaque or sclerotic
  ground-​glass appearance.
•	Histology shows bone replaced by fibrous tissues, woven bone, and
  giant cells.
• Prognosis good when growth ceases (but may progress after completion
  of growth).
•	Treatment = cosmetic or functional.
• ?Malignant potential—​WHO 2017 classification.
Cherubism (familial fibrous dysplasia)
• Autosomal dominant.
•	Rare.
• Symmetrical.
• Multicystic.
• May regress with maturity or continue progression.
Hyperparathyroidism
• Primary (hypersecretion of parathyroid hormone (PTH) by parathyroid
  adenoma).
• Secondary (usually caused by renal failure l parathyroid hyperplasia).
•	Tertiary hyperparathyroidism (where parathyroid overactivity becomes
  autonomous, even when cause of secondary problem is treated).
•	Histology of bone lesions shows osteoclastic giant cells.
• Multilocular cysts on X-​ray, i.e. osteitis fibrosa cystica (von
  Recklinghausen’s disease of bone). Indistinguishable histologically from
  central giant cell granuloma.
• Primary: i Ca2+, d, or normal phosphate, i alkaline phosphatase (ALP),
  and i PTH. Removal of parathyroid tumour l resolution of bone lesions.
• Secondary: normal Ca2+, i ALP, i PTH, and i phosphate.
•	Tertiary: i Ca2+, i ALP, and i PTH.
Paget’s disease (osteitis deformans)
• Polyostotic disease, rarely l clinical symptoms.
• Disorder of bone turnover, commonly affecting pelvis, calvarium of skull
  and limbs, occasionally maxilla and mandible.
• Initially osteolytic vascularity i with bleeding, rarely high output cardiac failure.
• Later osteosclerotic with i ALP.
• X-​rays show radiolucency, loss of trabeculation and lamina dura,
  followed by radio-​opacity (cotton-​wool areas) and hypercementosis.
•	Histology disorganized bone with reversal lines forming a mosaic pattern.
• Disorganized thicker bones are weaker predisposing to pathological fracture.
• 2–​5% risk of osteosarcoma.
438



      438       Chapter 0    Surgical principles and oral surgery


            Classic radiographic appearances
            of jaw lesions
            Multilocular radiolucencies
            •   Keratocyst.
            •   Ameloblastoma.
            •   Osteitis fibrosa cystica (Brown tumour of hyperparathyroidism).
            •   Central giant cell lesion.
            •   Cherubism.
            •   Odontogenic myxoma.
            •   Aneurysmal bone cyst.
            Radiolucencies at the angle of the mandible
            • Dentigerous cyst.
            • Keratocyst.
            • Ameloblastoma.
            Radio-​opacities
            • Chronic apical infection.
            • Odontoma.
            • Osteoma.
            Mixed
            •   Osteomyelitis.
            •   Calcifying epithelial odontogenic tumour.
            •   Cemento-​osseous dysplasia.
            •   Osteosarcoma.
Classic radiographic appearances of jaw lesions   439
40



     440    Chapter 0     Surgical principles and oral surgery


           Neck lumps
           Cervical lymph nodes
           General
           • Lymphadenitis = inflammation of a node.
           • Lymphadenopathy = disease in a node.
           • Lymph nodes in health are not normally palpable.
           • A node is usually palpable only once size exceeds 1cm.
           • Nodes that become inflamed can heal by resolution or with scarring,
             and remain palpable.
           • Most palpable nodes in children are infective/​reactive.
           • Most palpable nodes in those >50 years are metastatic
             aerodigestive SCC.
           Anatomy
           The following division of the neck nodes into regions as described at
           Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center (New York City, USA) is accepted
           universally:
           • Level I: contains the submental and submandibular nodes.
           • Level II: upper third of the jugular nodes medial to the SCM, inferior
             boundary is the plane of the hyoid bone (clinical) or the bifurcation of
             the carotid artery (surgical).
           • Level III: middle jugular nodes bounded inferiorly by the plane of the
             cricoid cartilage (clinical) or the omohyoid (surgical).
           • Level IV: defined superiorly by the omohyoid muscle and inferiorly by
             the clavicle.
           • Level V: contains the posterior cervical triangle nodes.
           • Level VI: includes the paratracheal and pre-​tracheal nodes.
           • Level VII: retropharyngeal nodes.
           •	The submental nodes (submental triangle):
             • drains the medial cheek;
             • lower lip and chin;
             • lower anterior teeth;
             • tip of tongue and anterior floor of mouth.
           •	The submandibular nodes between the anterior and posterior bellies of
             digastric muscle, outside capsule of submandibular salivary gland:
             • drains ipsilateral oral cavity, including teeth;
             • lower eyelid;
             • cheek;
             • nasal mucosa and skin.
           •	The facial node (anterior border of masseter on course of facial vein)
             drains facial skin, palate, upper teeth, and buccal mucosa.
           •	The parotid nodes (intra-​or extraglandular part of the parotid) drain
             forehead, scalp, auricle, EAM, eardrum, and EUT.
           •	The retropharyngeal nodes (posterior to the pharyngeal wall, between
             the prevertebral fascia and the pharyngeal wall) drain posterior nasal
             cavity, palate, nasopharynx, and EUT.
           • Upper jugular nodes drain the larynx, upper trachea, and oesophagus.
           •	The jugulodigastric node drains the posterior tongue, pharynx, and tonsil.
                                                                 Neck lumps     441


•	The spinal accessory node is located along the spinal accessory
  nerve, and receives afferent flow from the occipital, mastoid, and
  maxillary sinus.
•	The supraclavicular node is located at the jugulosubclavian junction and
  receives afferent flow from the spinal accessory, lower neck, upper
  chest, lung, and gastrointestinal tract.
•	The internal jugular node is located along the internal jugular chain and
  receives afferent flow from the superior nodal group, mucosal sites in
  the head and neck, and thoracic and axillary nodes.
• Occipital, periauricular, and external jugular nodes are part of the
  superficial nodal system and drain superficial structures such as the skin.
Causes of lymphadenopathy
Infective
• Local bacterial:
   • teeth;
   • skin;
   • tonsils.
• Local viral:
   • upper respiratory tract infection;
   • primary HSV.
• General bacterial:
   •	TB;
   • cat scratch disease;
   • secondary syphilis.
• General viral:
   •	HIV;
   • CMV;
   •	EBV;
   • rubella (occipital nodes, other causes are HIV and lice).

Neoplastic
• Local metastatic:
  • aerodigestive tract mucosal SCC;
  • other head and neck malignancy (skin, salivary, thyroid, paranasal
    sinuses);
  • breast;
  • stomach.
• General:
  • lymphoma;
  • leukaemia.

Other
• Drugs (allopurinol, penicillin, cephalosporins, atenolol, captopril,
  phenytoin, etc.);
• Sarcoidosis.
Management of cervical lymphadenopathy
•	History.
•	Examination.
42



     442    Chapter 0     Surgical principles and oral surgery

           Investigations may include:
           • OPT;
           • USS;
           • FNAC;
           • MRI;
           • FBC, ESR, serology for CMV, HSV, monospot, lactate
             dehydrogenase, ACE;
           • Biopsy may be indicated.
           Lymphoma
           • May be nodal or extranodal.
           • Diagnosis usually requires histology rather than cytology; i.e. node
             biopsy and/​or bone marrow biopsy.
           •	Hodgkin (Reed–​Sternberg cells)/​non-​Hodgkin lymphoma.
           • Staging requires bloods (FBC, lactate dehydrogenase, ESR), + low-​dose
             non-​contrast PET-​CT, FDG-​PET, MRI, contrast CT (chest, abdomen,
             and pelvis):
             • Stage I—​confined to single nodal region;
             • Stage II—​two or more regions on same side of diaphragm;
             • Stage III—​involvement of nodes on both sides of diaphragm + one
                organ or spleen;
             • Stage IV—​spread beyond lymph nodes; including liver, bone marrow,
                or nodular involvement of the lungs;
             • ± A (no systemic symptoms) or B (weight loss >10%, unexplained
                fever >38ºC or night sweats);
             •	E: extranodal spread;
             • S: splenic involvement;
             • X: bulky disease.
           •	Treatment:
             • IA and IIA—​RT;
             • IIB to IVB—​chemotherapy + RT.
           • 5-​year survival for Hodgkin lymphoma from the Surveillance,
             Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) database >92% I, 78% IV.
           • Classification constantly changing and complex.
           Midline neck swellings
           •	Thyroglossal duct cyst:
             • moves up on tongue protrusion;
             • may present with infection;
             • removal to include midline of hyoid (Sistrunck’s procedure) to reduce
               recurrence rate.
           • Sublingual dermoid cyst: lies between bellies of genioglossus deep to
             mylohyoid and, thus, can be removed intraorally.
           •	Thyroid swellings.
           Lateral swellings
           • Branchial (lymphoepithelial) cyst:
             • commonly arises from proliferation of residual remnants of second
               branchial cleft;
             • alternative theories of origin include proliferation of lymphoid tissue
               associated with epithelial remnants.
                                                        Neck lumps     443


•	Tumour in tail of parotid.
• Carotid body tumour:
  • lie at site of bifurcation;
  • of chemoreceptor origin;
  • compressible;
  • bruit on auscultation;
  • other parapharyngeal space tumours include schwannomas and
     neurilemmomas.
• Cervical rib: may have associated thoracic outlet syndrome.
• Cystic hygroma (see % Vascular malformations of the head and neck,
  p. 308).
• Pharyngeal pouch:
  • presents in posterior triangle behind SCM;
  • may fill after meal and empty on lying down;
  • endoscopic-​stapling treatment of choice.
4



    444    Chapter 0      Surgical principles and oral surgery


          Facial palsy
          Aetiology
          Central
          • Vascular.
          • Central nervous system (CNS) degenerative disease.
          •	Trauma.
          •	Tumours.
          • Congenital (Mobius syndrome).
          Temporal
          • Bacterial/​viral infections.
          •	Trauma.
          •	Tumours.
          • Cholesteatoma.
          • Iatrogenic.
          Parotid
          •	Tumours.
          •	Trauma.
          • Iatrogenic.
          • Idiopathic.
          Upper vs lower motor neurone lesions
          • Nuclei of lower motor neurones lie in motor nucleus of VII in the pons.
          • Lesions including and distal to motor nucleus cause LMN palsy.
          • Bell’s (lower motor neurone) palsy is a diagnosis of exclusion, caused by
            ?herpes simplex virus. Aciclovir and prednisolone decrease the incidence
            of permanent paralysis.
          • Upper motor neurone lesions spare the frontal region due to bicortical
            innervation of the VII nerve motor nuclei to the upper face. Some
            movement is preserved in emotion.
          • Bilateral lower motor neurone palsy—​consider Lyme disease (Borrelia
            bergdorfi) or Guillain–​Barré syndrome.
          Diagnosis
          History
          •	Examination to include:
            • upper vs lower motor neurone lesion;
            •	House–​Brackmann score (I (normal)–​VI (total paralysis)) grades
               degree of nerve damage;
            • hearing;
            • stapes reflex;
            • tearing test;
            • taste;
            • submandibular salivary flow.
          • Investigations:
            • neurophysiology;
            • plain films;
            • MRI/​CT;
            • USS.
                                                             Facial palsy       445


Goals of reconstruction
• Normal appearance at rest.
• Sphincter control.
• Symmetry with voluntary and involuntary movement.
Reconstructive options
• Direct repair: requires healthy nerve and healthy muscle.
• Interpositional nerve graft:
  • donor—​sural, greater auricular, cervical plexus (C3, C4);
  • connect stump to zygomatic and/​or buccal branches;
  • recovery takes 6–​18 months;
  • mass movement, dyskinesia, and synkinesia common.
• Myoneurotization: motor nerve and end-​plate transplanted.
• Cross-​facial nerve graft:
  • stage I—​pass nerve graft from buccal branch on normal side to
    affected side (monitor with Tinel testing);
  • stage II—​harvest functional muscle (gracilis, pectoralis minor) for free
    microneurovascular transfer to affected side and reinnervate with
    cross-​facial nerve graft.
• Nerve transfer: phrenic or hypoglossal nerve transferred to distal facial
  nerve. Produces synkinesis, rather than spontaneous expression.
• Dynamic muscle transposition: temporalis (fold-​over or direct),
  masseter, SCM, platysma, or anterior belly of digastric.
• Static procedures: e.g. brow lift, gold weights into eyelid, selective
  balancing neurectomy, facelift.
46



     446    Chapter 0      Surgical principles and oral surgery


           Paranasal sinuses
           • Sinus is a Latin word, meaning fold or pocket.
           • Sinuses in the skull are the paranasal sinuses and the mastoid air cells in
             the temporal bone.
           • Possible biological roles:
             • lightening the skull;
             • adding resonance to the voice;
             • humidification and warming of inhaled air.
           • Paranasal sinuses are vestigial at birth.
           Drainage
           • Maxillary sinuses drain into middle meatus.
           •	Ethmoidal cells: anterior, middle (both drain to middle meatus), and
             posterior (drain to superior meatus).
           • Frontal sinus drains into the middle meatus.
           • Sphenoidal sinus drains into the sphenoethmoidal recess above the
             superior concha.
           • Nasolacrimal ducts drain to the inferior meati.
           Maxillary sinus (antrum)
           Largest of the four paired paranasal air sinuses. The alveolus lies inferiorly,
           orbits superiorly, and nasal cavity medially.
           Acute maxillary sinusitis
           • Often follows viral upper respiratory tract infection.
           • Bacterial infection (anaerobes, Haemophilus spp., staphylococci, and
             streptococci).
           • May be difficult to distinguish from toothache (upper second premolars
             and beyond often have roots projecting into sinus).
           • Pain over maxillae worse on bending head forwards.
           • Nasal obstruction or discharge.
           •	Tenderness in the canine fossa.
           • Maxillary teeth tender to percussion.
           • Postnasal drip, pyrexia may also be present.
           • X-​rays—​OM view may show antral opacities (polyps or mucosal
             swelling) or fluid levels.
           •	Treatment = antibiotics (doxycycline or amoxicillin) and decongestants
             (oxymetazoline or xylometazoline) ± analgesics.
           Chronic maxillary sinusitis
           • Can follow acute sinusitis.
           • Mucosal lining hypertrophies and can form polyps contributing to
             obstruction of the ostia.
           • Postnasal drip is often present.
           •	Treatment aimed at reventilation of sinus.
           • Foreign body if present (e.g. tooth root) needs removal (incision in
             the canine fossa and bony window into the antrum by Caldwell–​Luc
             approach or by functional endoscopic sinus surgery (FESS)).
           •	Reventilation takes place by:
             • endoscopic enlargement of the ostium ± drainage of other affected sinuses;
             • FESS ‘turns a hall connected to a series of small rooms into a gymnasium’.
                                                     Paranasal sinuses       447


Extractions and the antrum
• Displacement of teeth and/​or roots into the sinus during extractions
  most often the straight conical palatal root of first molar.
•	Two X-​ray views required to localize or CBCT.
•	Removal under GA:
  • via socket;
  • Caldwell–​Luc;
  • FESS;
  • concurrent repair of any oro-​antral communication fistula.

Oro-​antral fistula
• A fistula is an abnormal permanent passageway between two body
  surfaces.
• An acute oro-​antral communication commonly occurs following
  extraction:
  • <5mm may heal spontaneously;
  • may subsequently fistulate.
• An oro-​antral fistula is an epithelial-​lined tract between the mouth
  and maxillary sinus. Can follow extraction of maxillary molar or
  premolar teeth.
• Clinical diagnosis: air bubbles through the tract when the patient
  attempts to blow out against a closed nose.
• Antral mucosa/​polyp may prolapse through the extraction socket.
• An oro-​antral fistula may be presentation of antral carcinoma.
Management
If small and suspected at time of extraction, avoid nose blowing, suture
socket, ± antibiotics and decongestant/​menthol steam inhalation.
Buccal advancement flap
•	Excise fistula (and submit for histology) or use as superior layer by
  placing a purse-​string suture, and raise a wide-​based buccal flap over
  bone. Incise the periosteum along the length of the flap to allow the
  mucosa to advance over the socket.
• Close over bone without tension and suture to palatal mucosa.
• Mattress sutures can be helpful.
• Postoperative antibiotics/​decongestant/​menthol/​analgesia.
• Flap reduces the depth of the sulcus at this point.
± Buccal fat pad flap
• When performing a buccal advancement flap, the buccal pad of fat is
  often exposed.
• Mobilize the fat and use it to provide a two-​layered closure (improves
  security of repair and rarely fails).
Palatal advancement flap
•	Excise fistula (use as stated if possible) and raise a full-​thickness
  mucoperiosteal palatal flap based on the palatine artery—​rotate over
  the socket and suture.
• Bare bone in the palate left to granulate under a cover plate.
• Problem: distortion/​shortening of the flap as it is rotated.
• May be required when buccal advancement has failed.
48



     448    Chapter 0     Surgical principles and oral surgery


           Osseointegrated implants
           Introduction
           • Osseointegration described by Professor Per-​Ingvar Brånemark in
             the 1960s.
           • Osseointegration = direct structural and functional connection between
             the implant surface and bone.
           •	Requires minimally traumatic placement of a biocompatible implant into
             bone, achieving primary stability to allow osseointegration.
           • Conventional protocols indicate 3–​6-​month implant healing period
             before restorative phase (i healing time in maxilla > mandible).
           •	Healing period before loading shortened (6–​8 weeks) with rougher,
             chemically treated, and bioactive surfaces.
           • Immediate placement (placement at time of extraction) possible in
             some sites, but technically more challenging.
           • Immediate restoration of implants (restoration of the implant/​s at the
             time of placement) has also been shown to have good success rate in
             selective cases.
           • Long ‘zygomaticus’ implants developed to engage distant bone of malar
             prominence when conventional implant fixtures not possible (more
             commonly used in oncology/​maxillectomy cases).
           • Success rates of implants (after initial integration) have been shown to
             be around 90–​95% at 10 years.
           • Shorter implants (5–​8mm lengths) have been shown to demonstrate
             comparable long-​term success rates to longer implants (>10mm) and
             may be used to avoid more extensive grafting procedures.
           • Success rates of immediate implants shown to be comparable to
             implants placed into healed ridges.
           • Peri-​implantitis (progressive bone loss around implant after placement)
             has been shown to affect implant survival in the long term and remains a
             current management problem with unpredictable prognosis.
           Implant–​tissue interface
           •	Exact mechanism of osseointegration unknown.
           • Direct bone-​implant contact occurs with titanium, titanium alloys, and
             zirconia.
           •	Titanium mainly used as it forms an oxide surface layer that is inert
             and resistant to body fluids, is easily machined, and is strong enough to
             withstand masticatory load.
           Placement of an implant
           Results in:
           • Bleeding and local inflammatory reaction.
           • A blood clot, which forms between implant and bone.
           • Blood clot organizes into a dense procallus.
           • Mesenchymal cell differentiation into osteoblasts and fibroblasts.
           • Procallus calcifies with the formation of woven bone at 3 weeks.
           • Lamellar bone laid down at 7 weeks.
           • Bone at implant interface becomes denser and matures with functional
             loading.
                                          Osseointegrated implants              449


• Peri-​implant sulcus forms lined with non-​keratinizing epithelium.
• Connective tissue fibres run parallel to the implant surface, forming a
  tight cuff not a direct attachment.
Anatomical considerations
• Implant success is proportional to bone density.
• Mandibular implants are more successful than maxillary ones.
•	The nasal floor, maxillary sinuses, and incisive foramen all affect implant
  placement.
• With resorption bone, stock becomes concentrated between the nasal
  wall, maxillary sinus, and tuberosity.
•	The canine eminence may be the most predictable site for implant
  placement in the maxilla.
• Bone resorption narrows arch width and increases intermaxillary
  distance.
• Implants may diverge away from the sagittal plane with greater lateral
  loading.
•	The mandible is predominantly cortical bone, especially at the
  symphysis.
•	The IDN restricts implant length proximal to mental foramen.
• Implants should not be placed within 2mm of the IDN.
•	The IDN can be damaged as it loops anterior to the mental foramen.
• CBCT has improved accuracy of surgical planning for implant
  placement.
History, examination, investigations l treatment plan
Patient assessed on clinical need and general and local considerations.
Dental implants should only be considered in dentition free of primary
dental disease and with occlusal stability.
General risk factors include
• Psychiatric disorders including dysmorphobia.
• Undiagnosed facial pain/​neuropathic pain.
• Pregnancy in the view of the need for additional radiographs.
• Immunosuppression (drug or disease).
• Previous radiotherapy i failure rates <50% (role of HBO uncertain).
• Smoking (i failure rate 15–​20%).
• Oral bisphosphonates (i risk of MRONJ).
• IV bisphosphonates considered to be a contraindication to implant
  placement (significant increase in non-​integration).
• Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and proton pump inhibitors have
  been linked to an i risk of initial implant failure.
• Poorly controlled diabetes.
• Parafunctional bruxism (i loading on implants and screws).
• Implants placed in patients with a susceptibility to periodontal
  attachment loss may exhibit an i risk of peri-​implantitis.
Local risk factors include
• Poor oral hygiene.
• Unstable periodontal disease (some links with peri-​implant disease).
• Dental caries.
450



      450    Chapter 0      Surgical principles and oral surgery

            •	Epithelial or connective tissue disease affecting wound healing (erosive
              lichen planus (LP), pemphigus).
            • Peri-​implantitis is an i risk when implants are placed into non-​
              keratinized oral tissues.
            • Management of peri-​implantitis is unpredictable with risk of progressive
              bone loss and implant failure.
            Investigations and records
            For example, periapical radiographs, OPT, CBCT, photographs and
            study casts.
            Treatment plan based on
            • Stable dentition with optimized oral hygiene and no other active dental
              disease (caries, periodontal disease).
            • Diagnostic set-​up for occlusal assessment.
            • Implant placement position driven by planned prosthetic tooth position.
            • Surgical guide constructed from diagnostic set-​up or custom-​made from
              CBCT for guided surgery.
            • Implant sites and need for grafting determined by prosthesis (fixed or
              removable) and imaging.
            • Grafting may be undertaken prior to implant placement or concurrently
              (such as guided tissue regeneration).
            Surgical procedure
            • LA, ± sedation, or GA.
            • Antibiotic use preoperatively may offer a small benefit to implant
              integration.
            • Precise technique with minimal soft and hard tissue trauma.
            • Minimal access using surgical guides, incisions lying over or close to the
              crest of ridge (CBCT-​guided surgery can minimize the need for soft
              tissue reflection).
            • Guides can be hard or soft tissue borne and may be retained with
              mini-​screws.
            • In anterior maxilla, crestal incision is palatal to ridge to bring keratinized
              mucosa to buccal and improve aesthetics.
            • Flaps are subperiosteal and any relieving incisions should be remote
              from implant sites.
            • Irrespective of the system used, a series of drills is employed to
              progressively enlarge and deepen the implant site.
            • Ideally, 3D implant position should not compromise choice of abutment,
              emergence profile, or prosthesis.
            • Continuous irrigation to avoid thermal bone necrosis.
            • Depth is preplanned and assessed using manufacturers’ gauges.
            • Intraoperative radiographs may be used to avoid damage to vital
              structures.
            • Dense bone can be tapped to ease insertion of threaded implants
              (commonly in mandible due to cortical nature of bone).
            • Once completed, implant site should be irrigated to clear any debris.
            • Implants can be submerged or transmucosal; increasingly used as:
              • two-​stage protocol (implant submerged at placement);
              • single-​stage protocol (healing abutment attached at placement).
                                                       Osseointegrated implants                           451


• Meticulous wound closure, avoiding tension.
• Care with provisional prosthesis to avoid direct pressure on site
  (adjustment of overlying dentures).
• Buried implants usually uncovered after 3–​4 months in second-​stage
  procedure.
Advanced techniques
Patients who most benefit from implants often have least bone. Methods
devised to overcome these difficulties include:
•	Ridge expansion and osseodensification in the maxilla using osteotomes
  to compact the central cancellous bone against the buccal and palatal
  walls. This corrects width, but not height.
• Bone grafting of smaller sites using autogenous bone (external oblique
  ridge, chin), allografts (cadaveric human tissue source), osteoconductive
  alloplasts (tri-​calcium phosphate, hydroxyapatite), xenografts (bovine,
  equine, porcine), or osteoinductive materials (e.g. bone morphogenetic
  proteins in a carrier graft).
• Larger onlay grafts (iliac crest, calvarium).
• Sinus floor elevation lifts the sinus lining creating space for a graft ±
  implant (although short implants may be used to negate the need for
  sinus augmentation).
• Distraction osteogenesis (demanding of patient and surgeon).
• Free tissue transfer, for larger defects usual following ablative surgery.
• Augmentation of the soft tissue envelope with free connective tissue
  grafts from palate, or xenograft collagen sheets.
• Guided tissue regeneration using an occlusive membrane to exclude
  gingival tissues from the wound allowing bone or periodontal ligament
  progenitor cell migration into the area.
Online resources
Association of Dental Implantology: M https://​www.adi.org.uk
BMJ Best Practice: M https://​bestpractice.bmj.com/​info/​
Dabar, U., Shahdad, S., Ashley, M., Barclay, S., Alani, A., Patel, D. (2019). Guidance on the standards
   of care for NHS-​funded dental implant treatment 2019. Restorative Dentistry-​UK. M https://​
   www.rcseng.ac.uk/​-​/​media/​files/​rcs/​fds/​publications/​implant-​guidelines.pdf
Faculty of General Dental Practice (2016). Training standards in implant dentistry. M https://​www.
   fgdp.org.uk/​guidance-​standards/​Training-​Standards-​in-​Implant-​Dentistry
GMC (under review). Consent guidance: patients and doctors making decisions together. M
   https://​www.gmc-​uk.org/​ethical-​guidance/​ethical-​guidance-​for-​doctors/​consent
Hospital Episode Statistics: M http://​www.hesonline.nhs.uk
NICE: M http://​www.nice.org.uk
SIGN: M http://​www.sign.ac.uk
452
 Chapter                                    453



Oral medicine
Introduction 454
Oral ulceration 456
Behçet’s syndrome 460
Lichen planus 462
Desquamative gingivitis 464
Pemphigus 466
Pemphigoid disorders 468
Erythema multiforme 470
Leucoplakia 472
Submucous fibrosis 476
Erythema migrans 477
Herpes simplex: oral infection 478
Herpes varicella zoster virus 480
Epstein–​Barr virus 482
Herpangina 484
Mumps 485
HIV infection 486
Acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis 488
Tuberculosis 490
Syphilis 492
Sarcoidosis 494
Orofacial granulomatosis 496
Crohn’s disease 498
Candidal infections 500
Trigeminal neuralgia 502
Glossopharyngeal neuralgia 504
Migraine 505
Cluster headaches 506
Temporal (giant cell) arteritis 508
Persistent idiopathic facial pain 510
Burning mouth syndrome 511
45



     454    Chapter       Oral medicine


           Introduction
           This chapter covers a disparate group of conditions that may present within
           the oral cavity. Some are manifestations of systemic disease; others are lo-
           calized to the head and neck region. An overview of the common infective
           conditions is included. Finally, conditions causing facial pain are considered;
           this section should be read in conjunction with % Chapter 9 on temporo-
           mandibular joint disorders.
Introduction   455
456



      456    Chapter      Oral medicine


            Oral ulceration
            Definition
            Defect in the continuity of oral epithelium where the underlying connective
            tissue is exposed. Causes include:
            • Traumatic:
               • physical;
               • chemical;
               • burns.
            • Infective: bacterial or viral.
            • Idiopathic: recurrent oral ulceration.
            • Iatrogenic: drug induced.
            • Mucocutaneous:
               • vesiculobullous disorders;
               • erosive lichen planus.
            • Neoplastic: see % Chapter 2 topics.
            • Systemic disease:
               • haematological disorders;
               • gastrointestinal disease;
               • autoimmune disorders, e.g. rheumatoid.

            Clinical
            • Diagnosis based on history: site, shape, size, symptoms including pain,
              duration, number present.
            • History should include questioning about general health, especially
              gastrointestinal, joint, and eye symptoms as oral ulceration may be a
              manifestation of systemic disease.
            • Investigations should be directed towards suspected condition
              and include biopsy (mandatory if present for >4 weeks), bloods,
              immunology, HLA screening.
            Treatment
            • Dependent on cause.
            Recurrent oral ulceration
            Up to 25% of the population are reported to suffer from recurrent aphthous
            ulceration at any one time, usually starting in childhood or adolescence.
            The underlying disease process is thought to represent a T-​cell-​mediated
            immunological reaction. Different subgroups of patients appear to have dif-
            ferent predisposing factors for their disease. The following have all been
            implicated:
            • Trauma.
            • Genetic:
               • i frequency with HLA-​A2, A11, B12, DR2;
               • family history in 40%.
            • Nutritional:
               • Crohn’s/​coeliac disease (both associated with certain HLA types) and
                 other inflammatory bowel disorders, ?secondary to malabsorption.
            • Haematological deficiencies: cause thinning of epithelial barrier.
                                                    Oral ulceration          457


• Immunodysregulation:
  • HIV;
  • chemotherapy;
  • IgA deficiencies.
• Hormonal:
  • related to fall in progesterone in luteal phase menstrual cycle;
  • often resolved during pregnancy.
• Hypersensitivity response: patients may demonstrate atopy or allergies
  to food.
• Stress related: possibly secondary to effects of stress on the immune
  system.
• Drugs: especially nicorandil, immune-​modulating drugs, and NSAIDs.
• Cessation of smoking.
There are three main types of aphthous ulceration:
• Minor ~80% of all cases.
• Major (10%).
• Herpetiform (10%).
Minor aphthous ulceration
• More common in ♀.
• Almost exclusively non-​keratinized mucosa, especially buccal/​labial.
• Often prodromal phase—​burning or itching.
• <5mm diameter, usually 1–​5 at once, extremely painful.
•	Ulcer with removable yellow/​white membrane and erythematous halo.
  Last 10–​14 days.
• Heal without scarring.
• Episodes vary from every few weeks to every few years.
Major aphthous ulceration
•	Usually occur post puberty.
• Occur on any mucosal surface including attached, although usually affect
  labial/​buccal mucosa and soft palate.
•	Up to 3cm diameter.
•	Up to 10 present at one time.
• More pronounced erythematous halo than minor.
• Last up to 6 weeks.
• May heal with scarring.
Herpetiform
• Morhologically similar to the ulcers caused by primary herpes virus
  infection.
• More common in ♀, occur in adulthood.
•	Usually affect non-​keratinized mucosa, although any mucosal surface can
  be affected.
•	Up to 100 small (1–​3mm) ulcers lasting 7–​10 days; may coalesce to
  resemble primary herpetic stomatitis.
• Frequent recurrences (may be almost continuous for 2–​3 years).
458



      458    Chapter      Oral medicine

            Investigations
            •	Review medical history for evidence of systemic disorders such
              as Behçet’s, gluten-​sensitive enteropathy, haematinic deficiencies,
              immunodeficiency.
            • Bloods:
              • commonly—​FBC, vitamin B12, folate, ferritin;
              • others advocate—​B vitamins, autoantibodies;
              • more controversial—​zinc, magnesium.
            • Consider biopsy if ulcer(s) persist.
            Treatment
            • Chlorhexidine mouthwash has been shown in RCTs to decrease length
              of ulceration.
            • Topical LA.
            • Doxycycline mouthwash.
            • Topical corticosteroids.
            • If very severe, consider oral prednisolone.
            • Triamcinolone injections for major aphthae (if biopsy negative for
              malignancy).
Oral ulceration   459
460



      460    Chapter      Oral medicine


            Behçet’s syndrome
            Definition/​epidemiology
            • International Study Group diagnostic criteria—​recurrent oral ulceration,
              plus any two of recurrent genital ulceration, ocular abnormalities, and
              positive pathergy test.
            • Most common in Turkey; also Middle Eastern and Mediterranean
              populations—​along the ‘Silk Road’.
            •	Usually young adults, ♂ > ♀ in Mediterranean populations, reversed in
              Asian populations, ♂ more severe symptoms.
            • In UK, 1–​5:100,000 affected.
            Cause
            •	Unknown.
            • Strong HLA association, HLA B51, HLA B27—​milder symptoms.
            • Other genes implicated, e.g. IL10.
            • Possible disturbance of T-​cell immune regulation after infection with
              unknown agent.
            •	Rates tend towards indigenous population after immigration, suggesting
              environmental factors also involved.
            • An autoinflammatory vasculitis gives rise to multisystem signs and
              symptoms.
            Clinical features
            Oral
            • Oral ulceration often first feature.
            • 99% will develop oral ulceration during course of illness.
            • Similar to recurrent oral ulceration, but soft palate and oropharynx
              involved.
            • Often more than six ulcers present, last 10 days.
            • All three types of recurrent oral ulceration seen but herpetiform is rare.
            Genital
            • Similar appearance to oral ulcers, but may heal with scarring as deeper.
            • ♀ vulva, cervix, vagina; ♂ scrotum, although anywhere in groin may be
              affected.
            • Present in 75% of patients.
            Ocular
            • Eye signs more common and more severe in ♂.
            • Present in 70–​85% of patients.
            • Anterior or posterior uveitis, conjunctivitis, corneal ulceration, and
              retinal vasculitis may all occur.
            • May lead to optic atrophy, cataracts, glaucoma, blindness.
            • 1:4 may have some visual loss.
            Other systems—​secondary to vasculitis
            • CNS: stroke, headaches, diplopia, balance disturbances, behavioural
              changes, bladder/​bowel incontinence.
            • Skin (50%): erythema nodosum and vasculitic changes usually affecting
              lower limbs, acne.
                                                   Behçet’s syndrome           461


• Musculoskeletal (2/​3 cases): especially knees, ankles, wrists.
• Gastrointestinal tract: vomiting, diarrhoea, symptoms similar to irritable
  bowel syndrome, anorexia.
• Cardiovascular system: pericarditis—​very common, DVT, cerebral
  venous thrombosis, aneurysms.
Investigations
•	No diagnostic test is positive in all cases.
• Skin hyper-​reactivity common—​1–​2 days after injecting saline under
  skin, results in a sterile pustule.
•	Raised ESR and IgA.
Treatment—​MDT approach
• In UK, now three centres of excellence for Behçet’s.
• Initial therapy for mucocutaneous disease—​70% effective:
  • steroids—​topical, oral, or IV;
  • colchicine—​reduces level inflammation of mucosa;
  • triple mouthwash (100mg doxycycline, 500mcg betamethasone, 1mL
     nystatin 100,000 units all dissolved in 10mL water four times daily);
  • antibiotics;
• Step-​up therapy—​66% effective:
  • Infliximab 5mg/​kg for four doses followed by SC anti-​TNF;
  • stop after 6 months, restart if flare up;
  • specialist centres only;
  • 70% will flare up within 3 months.

Prognosis
•	Usually relapsing/​remitting.
• Highly variable pattern of presentation and outcome.
• Mortality low unless CNS or significant vascular involvement l CNS/​
  pulmonary haemorrhage or bowel perforation.
462



      462    Chapter       Oral medicine


            Lichen planus
            Definition
            LP is thought to be an immunologically mediated disease of stratified squa-
            mous epithelium and mucocutaneous tissues. Affects skin, oral mucosa,
            genitalia, and occasionally conjunctivae and oesophagus (Fig. 11.1 and
            Fig. 11.2).
            Epidemiology
            Affects 1% of the population (2% for oral LP), presents 30–​55 years, ♀ > ♂
            for oral lesions, ♂ = ♀ for skin lesions.
            Cause
            Aetiology unknown. ?T-​cell-​mediated immune response.
            Clinical features
            Oral
            • Most commonly affects buccal/​labial mucosa, tongue, gingivae.
            •	Usually bilateral.
            • Often asymptomatic.
            •	Ulcerated/​atrophic areas may become painful.
            • Six clinical subtypes identified; more than one type may be evident:
              • reticular (70–​80%)—​raised white lines/​striae;
              • erosive (9%)—​painful, slow healing ulcers/​erosions, desquamative gingivitis;
              • atrophic—​red atrophic areas, desquamative gingivitis;
              • papular—​white papules 1–​2mm diameter;
              • plaque-​like—​thick white plaques, more common in smokers;
              • bullous—​rare, can be confused with pemphigus/​pemphigoid.

            Other manifestations
            • Violet papules 3–​5mm diameter: often with white (Wickham’s) striae on
              flexor surface wrists, ankles.
            • May occur in skin creases.
            • May get thickened scaly patches especially around ankles—​hypertrophic LP.
            • Itchy (Koebner phenomenon), but painful when scratched.
            • Skin lesions usually resolve in 6–​9 months.




            Fig. . Lichen planus.
                                                          Lichen planus        463




Fig. .2 Lichen planus.

•	Nail involvement: vertical ridges, occasional destruction of nail.
• Scalp: may develop permanent bald patches.
• Glans penis and vulva: similar appearance to oral lesions.
Diagnosis
Clinical appearance and biopsy if atypical, atrophic, or ulcerative.
Treatment
• Asymptomatic: reassurance, no active treatment.
• If pain/​ulceration: escalating treatment:
  • topical steroids—​hydrocortisone/​betamethasone lozenges, spray,
     inhalers; prednisolone or betamethasone mouthwash;
  • intralesional triamcinolone for large, non-​healing ulcers;
  • 2–​3 weeks oral prednisolone.
• Other drugs—​usually in tertiary care:
  • Azathioprine ± corticosteroids;
  • ciclosporin;
  • tacrolimus (avoid in epithelial dysplasia).

Prognosis
Oral lesions may persist for many years. Small risk of malignant change,
especially if erosive.
Lichenoid reactions
• Closely resemble lesions of erosive LP but due to drug reactions, e.g.
  antihypertensives including beta-​blockers, thiazides, and calcium channel
  blockers; allopurinol, NSAIDs.
• Graft vs host disease.
• Hypersensitivity to amalgam, constituents of toothpaste or unknown
  irritant.
• May closely match pattern of restorations.
•	Usually respond to removal of offending agent.
• Patch testing/​biopsy may aid diagnosis.
46



     464       Chapter     Oral medicine


           Desquamative gingivitis
           Descriptive term for chronic mucosal desquamation seen as part of a
           number of diseases. ♀ > ♂.
           Causes
           •   LP.
           •   Vesiculobullous diseases.
           •   Allergic responses, e.g. toothpaste.
           •   Psoriasis.
           •   Drug reactions.
           Clinical appearance
           •   Affects gingival tissues from margin to alveolar mucosa.
           •   Initially, loss of gingival stippling and erythema.
           •   Vesicles/​bullae form: often rupture before presentation.
           •   Long-​term: areas of ulceration/​erosion/​atrophy.
           •   Most common anteriorly, rarely affects palatal/​lingual mucosa.
           •   May be asymptomatic or sting/​burn, aggravated by certain foods.
           Investigation
           Biopsy including immunofluorescence, ?patch testing.
           Treatment
           • OH: plaque aggravates condition (gingival LP not seen in edentulous
             patients).
           • Topical steroids.
           • Treatment otherwise dependent on underlying condition.
Desquamative gingivitis   465
46



     466    Chapter      Oral medicine


           Pemphigus
           Definition
           Potentially life-​threatening vesiculobullous autoimmune disorder affecting
           skin and mucous membranes.
           Epidemiology
           Rare, ♂ = ♀, most commonly presents in middle age. Higher-​
                                                                     risk
           groups: Ashkenazi Jews, Mediterranean descent.
           Causes
           • Autoantibodies directed against desmogleins causing intradermal blisters
             due to loss of cell-​to-​cell adhesion of keratinocytes.
           •	Rarely drug-​induced or paraneoplastic (especially lymphoid tissue
             malignancy) causing severe oral and conjunctival erosions.
           • DR4 and DRw4 gene mutations common in people with pemphigus; may
             increase susceptibility to disease.
           Subtypes
           • Vulgaris and vegetans (vegetans rare, subtype of vulgaris).
           • Erythematous and folliaceus: don’t usually affect oral cavity.
           Clinical: pemphigus vulgaris
           • Commonest type.
           • All have mucous membrane erosions; more than half have cutaneous
             blisters and erosions.
           • Chronic course.
           • Oral lesions precede skin lesions by up to 1 year.
           • Orally, most common on soft/​hard palate, buccal mucosa, lips, gingivae
             (as desquamative gingivitis).
           • Fragile, flaccid bullae: rupture easily to form superficial erosions
             (Fig. 11.3).
           • Positive Nikolsky sign (digital sliding pressure causes epithelial
             separation).
           • Eyes: simple conjunctivitis (no scarring/​symblepharon formation so no
             threat to vision).
           Investigation
           • Biopsy for histology (H&E staining, specimen into formalin)
             (intraepithelial vesicles, ‘tombstone’ appearance) and
             immunofluorescence (specimen into frozen section substitute or normal
             saline and same-​day transport to laboratory).
           • Intraepithelial immune deposits (mainly IgG, IgM, and C3) present on
             direct immunofluorescence.
           • Indirect immunofluorescence positive in 80–​90%. Rarely performed.
           • Anti-​desmosomal antibodies in serum. Levels indicate disease activity.
                                                              Pemphigus        467




Fig. .3 Pemphigus—​erosions.

Treatment
If untreated can rapidly be fatal secondary to superimposed infection, fluid
and protein loss from extensive ruptured bullae, or swallowing difficulties
if oesophageal involvement. Mortality approaches 10%. Treatment options
include:
• Prednisolone: up to 200mg/​day (monitor BP, may need
   antihypertensives initially) with proton pump inhibitor ± osteoporosis
   prophylaxis.
• Once settled, reduce to maintenance dose.
• Pulse therapy—​high-​dose IV prednisolone and cyclophosphamide
   3 days/​month for at least 6 months.
• Azathioprine, cyclophosphamide, mycophenolate, mofetil, and
   ciclosporin can be used as adjunct to help reduce steroid doses.
• Tetracycline mouthwash reduces infection in ruptured bullae.
• Biological agents such as rituximab.
• Plasmapheresis.
468



      468    Chapter      Oral medicine


            Pemphigoid disorders
            Definition
            Subepithelial vesiculobullous disorders of autoimmune origin. Should not be
            considered as a distinct entity, but as a heterogeneous group of disorders
            that involve mucosal surfaces and, less commonly, the skin. Two main sub-
            types affect oral cavity—​bullous pemphigoid and benign mucous membrane
            (often called cicatricial) pemphigoid.
            Bullous pemphigoid
            Epidemiology
            Most common of vesiculobullous autoimmune conditions. Presents age
            60–​70 years, ♂ = ♀.
            Cause
            IgG autoantibodies against bullous pemphigoid antigens 180 and 230—​part
            of hemidesmosomes—​cause subepithelial clefting.
            Clinical
            • Lesions are thick-​walled bullae preceded by erythematous rash/​pruritus
               that may last for several weeks.
            • Lesions primarily affect skin of limbs/​abdomen.
            • 30% have oral lesions (tough bullae that rupture to form areas of
               shallow ulceration). Can be induced by pressure.
            • Desquamative gingivitis common.
            Investigation
            • Biopsy for histology (subepithelial clefting) and immunofluorescence.
            • Direct immunofluorescence: linear deposits of IgG at epithelial
               basement membrane zone.
            • Indirect immunofluorescence: positive in 40–​70%.
            Treatment
            Mild localized disease: topical corticosteroids, nicotinamide with doxy-
            cycline to reduce infective sequelae, dapsone, sulphonamides and top-
            ical immune modulators, e.g. tacrolimus second phase—​chlorambucil or
            cyclophosphamide.
            Benign mucous membrane pemphigoid
            Epidemiology
            Presents on average 10 years earlier than bullous pemphigoid and is
            rarer. ♀ > ♂.
            Cause
            Autoantibodies against one or more components of basement membrane,
            l subepithelial clefting.
            Clinical
            • Affects mucous membranes commonly.
            • Skin lesions rarer: same as bullous pemphigoid.
                                                 Pemphigoid disorders            469


Oral manifestations
• Desquamative gingivitis.
• Bullae/​vesicles often seen—​thick-​walled, therefore less likely to rupture
  than in pemphigus.
• Form extensive painful ulcers that may take weeks to heal.
• Can affect any part of oral cavity, but tend to recur at the same sites.
Ocular manifestations
• Present in ~25% patients who have oral manifestations.
• Initially, conjunctivitis and erosions as well as subconjunctival scarring.
• Xerophthalmia can occur, as lacrimal gland function reduces
  with scarring. Cornea produces keratin as a protective layer, l
  keratoconjunctivitis with d vision.
• Symblepharons (a symblepharon is a partial or complete adhesion of
  the palpebral conjunctiva of the eyelid to the bulbar conjunctiva of the
  eyeball) further decrease vision.
• Blindness if untreated.
Other manifestations
Can also affect genital, nasal, oesophageal, and laryngeal tissues and skin,
lesions similar to those in the oral cavity. Laryngeal involvement can be ser-
ious with airway obstruction from large bullae.
Investigation
• Biopsy: of intact bullae and normal tissue.
• H&E staining of a blister shows subepithelial clefting.
• Direct immunofluorescence of normal tissue shows linear IgG and C3
   deposits at basement membrane zone.
• Indirect immunofluorescence: rarely positive (~5% patients).
Treatment
• As for bullous pemphigoid.
• Ocular: all patients require regular ophthalmology review, even if no
  clinically obvious lesions.
470



      470    Chapter      Oral medicine


            Erythema multiforme
            Definition
            Sudden-​onset, immunologically mediated hypersensitivity reaction affecting
            skin and mucous membranes (Fig. 11.4).
            Epidemiology
            Uncommon, slight ♂ preponderance, aged 20–​30 years or children, often
            +ve family history.
            Causes
            Aetiology unclear, appears to be acute hypersensitivity reaction. Triggers
            can be identified in half of cases and include:
            • Drugs, e.g. carbamazepine, phenytoin, penicillins, NSAIDs.
            • Infection: classically herpes simplex virus (most common predisposing
              factor), mycoplasma pneumonia.
            •	UV light, cold, trauma.
            • Chemicals, e.g. food colorants, perfumes.
            • Pregnancy.
            • Malignancy.
            • Immune conditions.
            Clinical
            • Wide spectrum of symptoms from mild to life-​threatening.
            • Erythema multiforme minor—​typical and occasionally atypical papular
              target lesions with little or no mucosal involvement and no systemic
              symptoms.
            • Erythema multiforme major—​also severe mucosal involvement/​
              systemic symptoms.




            Fig. .4 Erythema multiforme.
                                               Erythema multiforme          471


• May have prodromal headache, malaise, arthralgia.
• Sudden-​onset skin lesions: target lesions (most commonly extremities
  and face), concentric rings with central papule that becomes ulcerated,
  surrounded by red and then pale oedematous ring.
• Oral ulceration, haemorrhagic lesions, circumoral crusting.
• Similar lesions may affect genitalia.
• Eye lesions: photophobia, conjunctivitis, symblepharon.
•	Usually subsides in 2 weeks, but can last >6 weeks.
•	Recurs in up to 25% of cases.
• Stevens–​Johnson syndrome: often drug related, must have either eye
  or genital involvement. Dusky macules and bullous lesions on the trunk
  and face rather than extremities. Toxic epidermal necrolysis may be the
  severest part of the same spectrum.
Investigation
• Diagnosis is clinical.
• Investigation for underlying trigger may reduce recurrences.
Treatment
•   Withdraw triggering factors.
•   Supportive therapy: nutrition, IV rehydration, OH.
•   Prednisolone or other immunosuppressants if severe.
•   Aciclovir if herpes simplex.
472



      472       Chapter    Oral medicine


            Leucoplakia
            Definition
            •	Updated definition: ‘white patches of questionable risk, having excluded
              other (known) diseases or disorders that carry no risk for cancer’.
            • Diagnosis of exclusion.
            Epidemiology
            3% white adults, 40+ years, ♂ > ♀ and up to 8% in parts of India.
            Risk factors
            •   Tobacco, especially reverse smoking.
            •   Alcohol.
            •   Betel nut.
            •   Chronic candidiasis
            •   Genetic predisposition.
            Clinical
            • Variable appearance:
              • homogeneous—​uniform white plaques, may be widespread
                (Fig. 11.5);
              • heterogeneous—​variable in appearance from flat to exophytic, often
                on erythematous background (speckled or erythroleucoplakia) (Fig.
                11.6). Associated with higher risk of malignant transformation.
            • Can affect any site: buccal mucosa/​vermillion/​gingivae most common.
            • High-​risk sites: floor of mouth/​lateral tongue.




            Fig. .5 Homogeneous plaque of leucoplakia.
                                                           Leucoplakia       473




Fig. .6 Speckled leucoplakia.

Investigation
Biopsy of most irregular site, especially if erythroleucoplakia. Histology
may show:
• Epithelial atrophy.
• Hyperplasia with/​without hyperkeratosis.
•	No dysplasia.
• Dysplasia of varying degree—​mild/​moderate/​severe. 3–​6% of oral
  white patches will show SCC. WHO recommends the term ‘squamous
  intraepithelial neoplasia’.
Relationship to oral SCC
• >50% of oral SCC arises without premalignant stage.
• Only 50% of oral leucoplakias show dysplasia.
• The term ‘potentially malignant oral lesions’ (PMOLs) is useful.
• Oral leucoplakia without dysplasia is still a PMOL (in ♀ non-​smokers
  progression to SCC still occurs).
•	No valid markers of progression of PMOL to SCC.
• Studies relate to loss of heterozygosity, p53 status.
• Wild or mutant p53 (detected by immunohistochemistry) is frequently
  found in PMOL, which progress to SCC.
• Mild dysplasia often regresses.
• Mild dysplasia: < 5% risk of progression.
• Severe dysplasia: ?15% risk of progression, but figures vary widely.
• A 2016 Cochrane review1 of interventions to prevent cancer arising in
  patients with oral leucoplakia concluded that the quality of studies was
  low and there was little high-​quality RCT evidence to support any one
  intervention.
47



     474    Chapter            Oral medicine

           Management
           • Patient education regarding risk factors.
           • Long-​term follow-​up, especially if high-​risk appearance/​high-​risk site/​
             widespread mucosal involvement.
           • Clinical photography.
           • Excision/​ablation if biopsy shows dysplasia.
           • See % Premalignant conditions, p. 67.
           Proliferative verrucous leucoplakia
           • Variant with particularly high risk of malignant transformation. Almost all
             lesions will develop SCC within a decade.
           • Initially flat white lesion develops exophytic/​papillomatous appearance,
             often multifocal.
           • ?Associated with HPV. Recent studies in an Indian population have
             refuted this in that cohort.
           •	Requires excision.
           Erythroplakia
           • An oral mucosal red patch that cannot be characterized as any other
             condition.
           • Clinically well-​demarcated erythematous papule/​plaque, often
             associated with leucoplakia.
           • Almost always severe dysplasia/​SCC at presentation.
           • Very high-​risk malignant transformation.
           •	Risk factors as leucoplakia.
           • Tends to affect older ♂.
           • Aggressive management with low threshold for excision/​ablation.
           Reference
           1. Lodi G, Franchini R, Warnakulasuriya S, Varoni EM, Sardella A, Kerr AR, et al. (2016). Interventions
              for treating oral leukoplakia to prevent oral cancer. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 7: CD001829.
Leucoplakia   475
476



      476    Chapter      Oral medicine


            Submucous fibrosis
            Definition
            Chronic, progressive scarring of the superficial oral connective tissue.
            Epidemiology
            Adults from Asia and emigrants from this area.
            Risk factors
            • Paan (areca nut/​slaked lime/​tobacco/​betel leaf ): arecolina, an active
              alkaloid found in areca nuts, triggers fibroblasts to increase collagen
              production. Also stimulates inhibitors of collagen breakdown.
            • Flavanoid, catechin, and tannin in betel nuts also cause collagen fibres to
              cross link, further inhibiting collagen breakdown.
            • Genetic predisposition, i frequency in HLA A10, B7, and DR3.
            • Can occur without paan exposure.
            Clinical
            • Chronic progressive disease.
            • Initially stomatitis with ulceration, erythema, and pigmentation.
            • Trismus develops secondary to formation of tight vertical bands of
              buccal mucosa.
            • Mucosa appears pale/​stiff with areas erythro/​leucoplakia and atrophy.
            • Burning, especially with spicy foods.
            • Tongue/​soft palate/​pharynx may be affected. Tongue decreases in size,
              epithelial atrophy with loss of filiform papillae.
            • Tonsillar atrophy.
            • Dry mouth.
            • Late stage:
              • hearing loss due to stenosis of EUT;
              • nasal tonality to voice;
              • dysphagia if oesophagus affected.
            •	Remains active even after stopping paan, suggesting that areca nuts
              initiate disease then affect gene expression in fibroblasts long-​term.
            Investigation
            • Biopsy.
            • Haematinics: often anaemic.
            Treatment
            • Stop risk factors: may halt but not improve symptoms.
            • Surgery: short-​term result—​fibrous banding recurs even in donor tissue
              grafted from distant site.
            • Intralesional triamcinolone to bands: limited benefit.
            • Other therapies such as interferons, hyaluronidase tried—​no robust
              evidence.
            Prognosis
            • Long-​term review. Up to 8% will develop oral cancer.
                                                     Erythema migrans          477


Erythema migrans
Definition
Common, aetiology unknown, also called geographic tongue/​benign mi-
gratory glossitis.
Epidemiology
Found in up to 10% of population, any age. Familial clusters suggest genetic
aetiology, ♀ > ♂, higher incidence in patients with psoriasis.
Clinical
•	Usually asymptomatic; some patients complain of pain with spicy foods.
• Commonly anterior two-​thirds of the tongue, but all mucosal surfaces
  can be involved.
• Initially, raised white lesion that develops central well-​demarcated
  erythematous areas in which atrophy filiform papillae has occurred.
• Change in site, size, and appearance with time.
• More common if fissured tongue.
Investigation
• Diagnosed on clinical appearance.
• Biopsy—​similar histologically to psoriasis.
• Consider checking for underlying causes of burning mouth/​tongue—​
  e.g. swab for Candida and bloods for a haematinic deficiency as there
  may be another cause of a newly sore tongue.
Management
•	Reassurance.
• Topical anaesthetic or occasionally topical corticosteroids if pain.
478



      478    Chapter      Oral medicine


            Herpes simplex: oral infection
            Definition
            • Herpes simplex virus (HSV) types 1 and 2 . Herpes viruses are DNA
              viruses with the characteristic of latency.
            • Oral lesions usually due to HSV-​1.
            • HSV-​2 much less common orally (usually genital infection) but clinically
              indistinguishable.
            • Primary and recurrent infection seen—​different clinical presentations.
            Epidemiology
            • ~60–​80% adults in the developed world have antibodies indicating prior
              infection.
            • Higher in developing countries.
            Primary herpes simplex virus infection (primary
            gingivostomatitis)
            Clinical
            • Incubation period 3–​9 days.
            • Transmitted by direct contact or viral shedding from carrier in saliva or
               other body fluids.
            • Often subclinical, asymptomatic in 80%.
            • Malaise, fever, anorexia, tender lymphadenopathy in anterior
               triangle neck.
            • Vesiculobullous eruption on mucosal surfaces. Pinhead ulcers fuse to
               form large, painful erosions affecting free and attached mucosa.
            • Often diagnostic punched-​out lesions at midpoint of gingival margin.
            • May also affect vermillion/​perioral skin.
            • Children—​gingivostomatitis, if older—​pharyngotonsillitis.
            • Lasts 5–​10 days.
            Diagnosis
            • Largely clinical.
            •	Rising HSV antibody titres, cytology, culture, polymerase chain reaction
              (PCR) detection HSV DNA.
            Treatment—​symptomatic support
            • OH.
            • Fluids.
            • Bed rest.
            • Antipyrexials/​topical LAs.
            • Antiviral agents—​if immunosuppressed or early presentation.
            Recurrent herpes simplex virus infections
            After primary infection, virus remains latent in dorsal root and autonomic/​
            cranial nerve ganglia (trigeminal or geniculate) and can be reactivated. May
            cause clinical signs, but some patients will have asymptomatic shedding of
            viral particles into saliva and will be infectious at this time.
            Incidence
            Up to 15% of the adult population have recurrent infections.
                                     Herpes simplex: oral infection      479


Reactivating factors
•	UV light.
• Stress.
• Trauma.
• Febrile illnesses.
• Immunosuppression.
Clinical
• Herpes labialis (cold sores):
   • prodromal burning/​tingling;
   • macules then vesicles, pustules, scabbed lesions over 3–​4 days;
   • heal without scarring;
   • may also affect nasal mucocutaneous junction.
• Intraoral herpes:
   • ulcers—​often multiple, gingiva/​hard palate; heal in 1–​2 weeks.

Treatment
• Topical antivirals, e.g. 5% aciclovir applied in prodromal period.
• Systemic antivirals indicated if immunosuppressed/​frequent
  recurrences. Must be given early.
• Prophylactic oral antivirals if severe.
• Increasing resistance to antivirals becoming a problem in
  immunosuppressed patients.
480



      480    Chapter       Oral medicine


            Herpes varicella zoster virus
            Definition
            • Human herpes type 3 virus.
            • Primary infection: chickenpox (varicella).
            • Viral reactivation: shingles (zoster).
            Epidemiology
            • Chickenpox mainly affects children with peak age 5–​9 years.
            • Shingles—​particularly affects elderly, immunosuppressed, and alcoholic
              people.
            • Vaccination—​offered to 70–​80-​year-​olds in UK, and to populations, e.g.
              healthcare workers who may pass the virus on to someone at risk of
              serious complications if exposed.
            Chickenpox
            Clinical
            • Droplet spread via mucosa in the upper respiratory tract.
            • Incubation period 14–​21 days.
            • Prodromal illness with malaise, pharyngitis, rhinitis.
            • Oral (buccal mucosa) vesicles and ulceration may precede skin lesions.
            • Skin: pruritic erythema then vesicles, pustules, crusted lesions.
            • Begins on face/​trunk; extremities involved later.
            • Contagious until all lesions crusted.
            Diagnosis
            • Clinical grounds.
            •	Rising antibody titres.
            Management
            • Supportive.
            • Antivirals if early diagnosis and immunosuppressed.
            • Complications increase with age, immunosuppression, pulmonary
              disease, pregnancy.
            Shingles
            Clinical
            • Higher incidence with increasing age.
            • May be a marker of other disease, such as haematological or other
               malignancy.
            • Virus dormant in dorsal/​cranial root ganglion after primary infection.
            •	Reactivates—​shingles in one dermatome.
            • Prodromal period with neuralgia 1–​4 days prior to rash.
            • Vesicles then pustules, ulceration, crusting over 7–​10 days.
            • Pre-​herpetic pain may lead to unnecessary extractions.
            • Skin may heal with scarring/​hypopigmentation.
            • If ophthalmic division trigeminal nerve involved: risk of corneal
               ulceration/​visual loss. Involve the ophthalmology team early.
            •	Up to 15% develop post-​herpetic neuralgia.
                                       Herpes varicella zoster virus          481


• Post-​herpetic neuralgia responds to gabapentin or other anticonvulsants,
  antidepressants, topical lidocaine, or capsaicin cream.
• Most cases of post-​herpetic neuralgia resolve spontaneously within
  1 year.
• HZV infection risk factor for stroke and MI.
Management
• Aciclovir if seen within 3 days of first vesicle: decreases incidence of
  post-​herpetic neuralgia.
• Ophthalmology opinion essential if ophthalmic branch affected.
Ramsay Hunt syndrome
•	Rare syndrome.
•	Unilateral VII cranial nerve palsy.
• Herpes zoster vesicles in the external auditory meatus and ipsilateral
  pharynx.
• Vertigo/​hearing loss secondary to involvement of cranial nerve
  VIII—​geniculate ganglion close to cranial nerve VIII within the bony
  facial canal.
482



      482    Chapter        Oral medicine


            Epstein–​Barr virus
            Definition
            Human herpes type 4 virus implicated in numerous conditions, spread via
            saliva. 90% of the world population is infected. Remains latent in B cells.
            Oral manifestations
            Infectious mononucleosis
            • Infection often subclinical, especially in children.
            • Prodromal lethargy.
            • Sore throat/​tonsillar enlargement, fever, rhinitis, cough.
            • Generalized tender lymphadenopathy in >90%.
            • Hepatosplenomegaly, rarely splenic rupture.
            • Skin rashes (also seen if given amoxicillin).
            • Petechiae hard/​soft palate.
            • Acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis.
            • May be protracted recovery over many months.
            •	Remains latent in pharyngeal/​salivary epithelial cells.
            • Atypical lymphocytes in peripheral blood, resemble monocytes.
            • Diagnosis confirmed using Mono-​spot—​may be negative during first
               week of illness.
            • EBV antibody test can determine recent or past infection.
            • Treatment is supportive only unless life-​threatening airway obstruction
               secondary to tonsillar enlargement—​treat with systemic steroids.
            Hairy leucoplakia
            (See Fig. 11.7.)
            • Hyperkeratosis usually lateral border tongue, may involve any part of
              the oral cavity.




            Fig. .7 Hairy leucoplakia.
                                                  Epstein–Barr virus    483


• Associated with immunosuppression—​seen mainly in transplant and
  HIV-​positive patients.
• Diagnosed by biopsy and identification of EBV.
•	No treatment required. May resolve with antivirals, but recurs once
  stopped.
• Indicator for HIV testing in consented patient.
Head and neck associations of EBV
•	Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (4 in 5).
• Burkitt’s lymphoma (1 in 5).
• Hodgkin’s lymphoma (just under half ).
• Other lymphoproliferative disorders.
48



     484    Chapter       Oral medicine


           Herpangina
           Definition
           Coxsackie infection (usually type A) typically spread by faecal–​oral route,
           although can be via respiratory droplet spread or fomites. Fresh water lakes
           may be a reservoir for transmission. Commonest <4 years old.
           Clinical
           • Incubation period 7–​14 days.
           • Periodic epidemics, usually every few years, summer/​autumn.
           • Most cases mild/​subclinical infection.
           • Fever, general malaise, vomiting, headache.
           • 2–​4mm vesicular then ulcerative lesions of oropharynx.
           • Site pathognomonic: affects uvula, palate, fauces.
           • Bilateral anterior lymphadenopathy may occur.
           •	Rarely, may develop CNS lesions and cardiopulmonary failure.
           Treatment
           • Supportive only as self-​limiting.
           Hand, foot, and mouth disease
           • Lesions as already described but extending throughout oral cavity.
           •	Up to 1cm diameter.
           • Also affects palmar surfaces hands and feet.
                                                                       Mumps    485


Mumps
Definition
RNA paramyxovirus infection, mainly affecting parotid glands.
Epidemiology
Incidence i in UK following d measles, mumps, rubella (MMR) vaccination
uptake—​falling herd immunity, especially in young adults.
Clinical
• Spread by droplet/​direct contact.
• Incubation period ~16 days.
• 30% have subclinical infection.
• Prodromal period with fever, headache, anorexia, myalgia.
• Swelling lower pole parotids, unilateral in ~25%, peaks at 2–​3 days.
• Submandibular glands affected ~10%.
•	Redness/​oedema of Wharton’s/​Stensen’s ducts.
• In adults, involvement of other tissues is much more common.
• Epididymo-​orchitis (25%): usually unilateral, infertility rare.
• Oophoritis and mastitis: post-​pubertal ♀. No impairment fertility.
• Pancreatitis.
• Deafness.
• Meningoencephalitis.
• Thyroiditis, prostatitis, myocarditis, hepatitis, nephritis, lacrimal gland
  involvement all rare.
Diagnosis
• Clinical—​sometimes after other negative investigations for obstructive
  causes of salivary gland swelling.
•	Reverse transcription-​PCR/​enzyme-​linked immunosorbent assay
  (ELISA).
• Mumps-​specific IgM—​may be falsely negative in previous immunized
  populations.
Treatment
• Supportive: analgesics, hydration.
• Hospital admission may be required in adults.
• Mumps is a notifiable disease.
486



      486    Chapter        Oral medicine


            HIV infection
            Definition
            The human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is a RNA retrovirus that is able
            to copy its RNA into DNA using the enzyme reverse transcriptase and in-
            corporate this DNA into that of the host. Antibodies develop, but are not
            protective, l lifelong infection. It affects cells with CD4 receptors, mainly
            T-​helper cells, monocytes, and dendritic cells. Damage and decrease in
            number of these leads to a marked reduction in the CD4 count and thus
            the T-​mediated immune response. Patients are therefore prone to infec-
            tion with fungi, encapsulated bacteria, and other viruses. Spread is via ex-
            change of infected body fluids including semen and blood. Virus may be
            detected in saliva. Worldwide, heterosexual sex is the most common mode
            of transmission.
            Epidemiology
            WHO estimated that 36.9 million people worldwide were infected at the
            end of 2017. Infection prevalence rates approach 50% in some sub-​Saharan
            African nations.
            Clinical
            Acute infection
            • Often subclinical, symptoms in 80%.
            • Acute self-​limiting viral illness clinically similar to infectious
              mononucleosis (within a few weeks of infection).
            • Seroconversion occurs within 1–​2 months.
            Asymptomatic stage
            • 8–​10 years, increasing with modern treatment towards potentially
              lifelong asymptomatic infection.
            • May have generalized persistent lymphadenopathy. Biopsy is indicated
              if persistently raised ESR or lactate dehydrogenase or localized, bulky
              nodes as i incidence of non-​Hodgkin lymphoma in HIV.
            HIV disease
            Symptomatic HIV infection, including fungal and viral infections, e.g.
            Pneumocystis jirovecii, histoplasmosis infections, virally induced malignancies,
            CNS symptoms including dementia, weight loss, and general deterioration.
            AIDS (acquired immunodeficiency syndrome)
            Variable presentation, includes CD4 count <200 (poor prognosis).
            Oral manifestations of HIV infection
            Strongly associated
            • Candidosis: often affecting entire oropharynx (treatment—​systemic
               antifungals).
            • Hairy leucoplakia (EBV).
            • HIV periodontal disease:
               • initially linear erythema along gingival margin;
               • acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis;
               • gross vertical bone loss in presence of good OH;
               • limited response to conventional periodontal treatment—​may
                 progress to noma (cancrum oris).
                                                              HIV infection        487


• Kaposi’s sarcoma:
  • HHV-​8 related;
  • multifocal neoplasm of vascular origin;
  • clinically red/​brown, non-​blanching lesions;
  • common in oral cavity;
  • treatment only indicated if causing symptoms;
  •	RT, intralesional vincristine, local excision—​all palliative only.
•	Non-​Hodgkin lymphoma, often extranodal.
Less commonly associated
• Aphthous ulceration, often atypical, but only if had prior to HIV
  infection.
• Salivary gland disease: HIV-​associated lymphoepithelial cysts or focal
  lymphocytic sialadenitis affecting both parotid glands.
• Viral infections other than EBV, e.g. HSV, VZV, CMV, HPV (high
  incidence of dysplasia in oral papilloma caused by HPV). Undertake
  biopsy if suspicious.
• Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura.
Possibly associated with HIV
• Other bacterial/​fungal infections.
• Hyperpigmentation.
•	Neurological problems, e.g. trigeminal neuralgia, dysaesthesia, palsies.
• SCC of the oropharynx: same risk factors as general population but
  develop disease at earlier age.
Diagnosis
• Counselling mandatory prior to testing.
• HIV antibodies develop by 3 months (98% sensitivity, may be negative early).
• Antigen testing and/​or PCR may detect infection earlier.
• Decreasing CD4 counts and CD4/​CD8 ratio—​used more for disease
  monitoring.
• Presence of unusual pathology, e.g. Kaposi’s sarcoma, hairy leucoplakia,
  may raise suspicion of the diagnosis.
Treatment
Antiretroviral treatment under the care of HIV specialists—​reduces viral
load to undetectable level, making transmission rates also negligible. Starting
treatment as early as possible helps prevent long-​term consequences of in-
fection. People who survive the first year of treatment are now likely to live
about as long as those with a normal life expectancy.
   Antiretroviral treatment can result in facial lipoatrophy—​the use of fillers
can be considered.
   Individual pathologies are treated as they arise.
48



     488    Chapter      Oral medicine


           Acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis
           Definition
           Acute anaerobic infection of gingival tissues.
           Epidemiology
           • <0.1% of the population.
           • More common in young ♂ and young children in developing countries.
           Risk factors
           • Smoking.
           • Immunosuppression.
           • Malnutrition.
           • Poor OH.
           • Local trauma.
           •	Recent systemic illness.
           Cause
           Mixed infection: fusiform bacteria, spirochaetes (Borrelia vincentii), and
           anaerobic rods.
           Clinical
           • Interdental papillae initially oedematous and haemorrhagic, then
             develops punched-​out ulcers and necrosis, spreads along gingival margin.
           • Pain++.
           • Foetor oris.
           • If severe, may get necrosis of underlying bone and even skin l noma.
           Treatment
           •	Remove bacterial challenge—​hygienist/​OHI.
           • Hydrogen peroxide/​chlorhexidine mouthwash.
           • Metronidazole or tetracycline.
           • Investigate for any underlying immune deficiency.
           Noma (cancrum oris)
           Thought to be an extension of acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis,
           mainly affecting malnourished children in developing countries shortly after
           debilitating illness. The disease process extends into surrounding lingual and
           facial tissues, causing discoloration, then necrosis. Spread disrupts anatom-
           ical barriers and continues through muscle and bone. Treatment is with anti-
           biotics, conservative debridement, and nutritional support. Reconstruction
           of often extensive resultant defects is commonly required once disease is
           quiescent for at least a year.
Acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis   489
490



      490    Chapter      Oral medicine


            Tuberculosis
            Definition
            Caseating granulomatous infection caused by mycobacteria.
            Epidemiology
            One of the top ten causes of death worldwide. 25% of the world’s popu-
            lation has latent TB (WHO estimate). Incidence has i in the developing
            world, immigrants from these areas, and the immunosuppressed. HIV infec-
            tion: 20–​30 times more likely to develop TB.
            Cause
            Mycobacterium tuberculosis and, more rarely, M. bovis.
            Clinical
            Droplet spread (M. tuberculosis) or via non-​pasteurized milk (M. bovis).
            Primary TB
            • Almost always affects lungs with non-​specific chronic inflammatory
               reaction.
            •	Usually asymptomatic.
            • 5–​10% of infections are reactivated, may be many years later l active
               disease (secondary TB).
            • Primary oral involvement very rare, often secondary to drinking
               infected milk.
            Secondary TB
            • Low-​grade fever.
            • Malaise.
            • Anorexia.
            • Weight loss.
            •	Night sweats.
            • Lesion usually pulmonary if M. tuberculosis but may spread to
              different sites.
            • Head and neck:
              • cervical lymphadenopathy (collar-​stud abscess, scrofula);
              • intraoral ulceration, fissures, or granular areas (secondary infection
                 from infected saliva);
              • tongue is the most common site for ulceration, and involvement may
                 result in odynophagia;
              • rarely osteomyelitis.

            Investigation
            • Mantoux test—​for latent TB.
            • Interferon gamma release assay.
            • Biopsy of unusual oral lesions for histology and microbiology.
            •	Ziehl–​Neelsen stain for acid-​fast bacilli—​50% sputum screens will be
              negative.
            •	Need to culture for 6 weeks or longer.
            • CXR.
            • PCR techniques for TB DNA can give a rapid diagnosis.
                                                      Tuberculosis        491


Treatment
•	Referral to respiratory physicians: long-​term multiagent therapy
  (usually isoniazid and rifampicin for 6 months (12 if extrapulmonary)
  + pyrazinamide and ethambutol for first 2 months). Drug resistance
  becoming a problem especially in HIV-​related disease.
• Multiresistant TB—​does not respond to rifampicin or isoniazid.
• Second-​line treatments—​more toxic. Now seeing resistance to these—​
  no further treatment options currently available.
• TB is a notifiable disease.
492



      492    Chapter       Oral medicine


            Syphilis
            Definition
            Sexually transmitted infection caused by Treponema pallidum.
            Incidence
            i in recent years especially in ♀.
            Primary syphilis
            • Primary chancre (single, painless ulcer with indurated base) that heals in
               1–​2 months (Fig. 11.8).
            •	Usually solitary. Genitalia/​anus are the most common sites.
            •	Rarely occurs on upper lip or oral cavity.
            • May be associated with rubbery regional lymphadenopathy.
            Secondary syphilis
            • 4–​8 weeks post infection.
            • Systemically unwell with malaise, fever, headache, weight loss.
            • Widespread generalized maculopapular cutaneous rash.
            • Lymphadenopathy.
            • Oral manifestations:
               • mucous patches—​sensitive white patches on oral mucosa (30%);
               • may slough l exposed connective tissue and snail-​track ulcers
                 (serpiginous ulceration);
               • may affect any mucosal surface.
            •	Resolves by 12 weeks, but symptoms may recur for up to 1 year.




            Fig. .8 Primary chancre on tongue.
                                                              Syphilis     493


Tertiary syphilis
• Affects up to 1/​3 of patients.
• Latent period of up to 30 years.
• Multisystem pathology usually secondary to endarteritis obliterans
  affecting vascular system including aneurysms, left ventricular
  hypertrophy, and CCF.
• CNS involvement.
• Gumma (granulomatous inflammation) at widespread sites.
• Oral manifestations:
  • gumma tongue/​palate;
  • interstitial glossitis—​tongue becomes lobulated and irregular as
     muscles contract as gumma heal;
  • syphilitic glossitis—​atrophy and loss tongue papillae;
  • malignant change—​cause of the rarely seen cancer of the dorsum of
     the tongue.
Congenital syphilis
• Frontal bossing.
• Short maxilla.
• Saddle nose.
• High-​arched palate.
• Mandibular prognathism.
• Hutchinson’s triad:
  • VIII cranial nerve deafness;
  • ocular interstitial keratitis;
  • Moon’s/​Mulberry molars and Hutchinson’s notched, tapering incisors.

Investigation
• Smear lesion: dark ground microscopic-​illumination of organisms.
• Serological testing: VDRL (Venereal Disease Research Laboratory),
  TPHA (Treponema pallidum haemagglutination assay), FTA-​ABS
  (fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption) tests.
Treatment
•	Referral to a sexual health clinic
• Treatment is with parenteral penicillin:
  • Single dose early in disease, longer course if late presentation;
  • May be incomplete response if lymphadenopathy or in HIV patients.
• Macrolides—​increasing resistance.
49



     494       Chapter    Oral medicine


           Sarcoidosis
           Definition
           Systemic granulomatous disorder of unknown aetiology, can affect any
           organ. Accumulation of lymphocytes and macrophages and formation
           of non-​caseating granulomas. Lungs and lymph nodes affected in 90% of
           patients.
           Epidemiology
           Affects young adults, Scandinavians, ♀ > ♂, family history +ve.
           Clinical
           •   Lethargy, malaise.
           •   Bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy.
           •   Pulmonary infiltrates.
           •   Enlarged salivary glands.
           •   Xerostomia.
           •   Cervical lymphadenopathy.
           •   Erythema nodosum skin.
           •   Anterior uveitis.
           •   Cardiac arrhythmias.
           •   Hearing loss.
           •   Oral mucosal involvement rare but includes:
               • erythematous submucosal nodules;
               • orofacial granulomatosis.

           Investigation
           • CXR.
           • Labial gland biopsy: show non-​caseating granulomas in up to 60%.
           • Bloods:
             • raised ESR;
             • hyperproteinaemia;
             • i serum ACE in acute phase;
             • hypercalcaemia;
             • anaemia/​leucopenia—​bone marrow infiltration.

           Treatment
           •	Referral to a chest physician.
           • Most cases resolve spontaneously within 2 years but up to 1/​3 may
             become chronic with granuloma formation.
           • Systemic steroids required if lungs or eyes involved.
           • Mortality 1–​6%.
           • Stage I: 55–​90% spontaneous remission (bilateral hilar
             lymphadenopathy);
           • Stage II: 40–​70% remission—​as for stage 1 plus pulmonary infiltrates;
           • Stage III: 20% remission—​pulmonary infiltrates without hilar
             lymph nodes;
           • Stage IV: remission not expected—​extensive fibrosis with distortion.
                               Sarcoidosis   495


Heerfordt syndrome
Sarcoidosis associated with:
•	Uveitis.
• Parotitis.
• VII nerve palsy.
• Lacrimal gland swelling.
496



      496       Chapter    Oral medicine


            Orofacial granulomatosis
            Definition
            Uncommon condition presenting with diffuse enlargement of the lips,
            cheeks or face, secondary to granulomas causing oedema, in the absence
            of a recognized systemic condition known to cause granulomas such as
            Crohn’s disease. Appears to be due to an abnormal immune reaction
            (Fig. 11.9).
            Epidemiology
            • Presents at any age, usually teenagers/​young adults.
            • ?Allergic reaction to cinnamon, benzoates (E201 to E219, also found in
              toothpastes), cinnamaldehyde, tomatoes, chocolate.
            • Screen for symptoms of sarcoidosis or Crohn’s disease in some
              patients.
            Clinical
            • Either intermittent or permanent enlargement of lips or cheeks, or
              sometimes diffuse facial swelling.
            • Intraorally may see:
              • oedema;
              • ulcers;
              • cobblestone mucosa;
              • hyperplastic palatal tissue.

            Investigation
            •   Patch test for allergens.
            •   Bloods: FBC, haematinics, ESR, albumin, calcium, ACE.
            •   Buccal or lip mucosal biopsy: must include underlying muscle.
            •   Biopsy shows non-​caseating granulomas in 50% of cases and oedema,
                negative stains for organisms and foreign material.




            Fig. .9 Orofacial granulomatosis.
                                       Orofacial granulomatosis           497


Treatment
•	Referral of those with gastrointestinal tract symptoms or blood tests
  showing malabsorption.
• Avoidance diet.
• Topical corticosteroids if oral ulceration.
• Terfenadine 60mg once or twice daily to reduce lip swelling.
• Treatment often difficult and unsatisfactory.
498



      498    Chapter      Oral medicine


            Crohn’s disease
            Definition
            Chronic granulomatous disease of unknown cause that may affect any part
            of the gastrointestinal tract.
            Epidemiology
            Usually diagnosed in young adults, often positive family history.
            Clinical
            Oral
            • Cobblestone buccal mucosa with mucosal tags and folds.
            • Oral ulceration.
            • Diffuse swelling lips/​cheeks.
            •	Raised, granulomatous gingival lesions.
            Gastrointestinal tract
            • Similar appearance throughout gastrointestinal tract with scarring,
              infection, abdominal pain, obstruction, and development of fistulae.
            Investigation
            • In conjunction with gastroenterologists.
            • Sigmoidoscopy and biopsy: shows non-​caseating granulomas with
              macrophages, epithelioid cells, and occasional giant cells.
            • Barium enema has been replaced by CT enterography in many centres.
            Treatment
            • Occasionally, topical steroids may control oral lesions.
            • More usually require systemic treatment including steroids,
              aminosalicylates, e.g. sulfasalazine, mercaptopurine, and azathioprine.
            • Biological therapies such as infliximab and adalimumab (anti-​TNF
              monoclonal antibody) are increasingly used.
Crohn’s disease   499
50



     500    Chapter      Oral medicine


           Candidal infections
           Definition
           Candida albicans is carried as an oral commensal in 75% of the population.
           It can, however, cause infection (candidosis). Two forms of Candida are
           seen—​yeast, which is relatively benign, and hyphal, which has the ability to
           invade host tissue.
           Risk factors
           Symptomatic infection develops if there is a change in the equilibrium be-
           tween the oral mucosal environment, the patient’s immune status, and the
           strain of Candida. i infection is seen in:
           • Denture wearers, especially if OH is poor.
           • Immunocompromised patients, including diabetics, steroid users.
           • Xerostomia.
           • Broad-​spectrum antibiotics.
           • Malignant disease/​chemotherapy/​RT.
           • Malnutrition.
           • Smokers.
           • Extremes of age.
           Classification
           Group 1—​primary oral candidoses
           • Acute—​pseudomembranous, erythematous.
             • creamy white plaques—​can be rubbed off leaving
               erythematous areas;
             • bleeding points;
             • may be burning sensation and bad taste;
             • affects palate, tongue, buccal mucosa;
             • seen in neonates and patients with chronic disease.
           • Chronic—​pseudomembranous, erythematous, hyperplastic (plaque-​like
             and nodular—​see later in list), e.g. in immunocompromised patients,
             inhaled steroid users:
           • Candida-​associated lesions—​see later in list—​candida-​associated
             denture-​induced stomatitis, angular cheilitis, median rhomboid glossitis.
           • Hyperplastic candidosis (or candida leucoplakia):
             • considered premalignant—​occurs mainly in smokers/​drinkers;
             • often deficiency in haematinics;
             • may have a high rate of malignant transformation to SCC;
             • buccal mucosa adjacent to commissures most common site;
             • varies from white plaques to speckled erythroleucoplakia;
             • candidal hyphae seen within epithelium on biopsy;
             • i dysplasia in speckled lesions;
             • dysplasia may regress with fluconazole treatment;
             • some authorities consider it to be candidal infection superimposed on
               leucoplakia, rather than a separate entity.
                                                  Candidal infections             501


• Angular cheilitis:
  • Staphylococcus aureus also present in ~60%;
  • can be associated with d lower face height in edentulous individuals.
• Median rhomboid glossitis—​pseudoepitheliomatous hyperplasia:
  • often severe pain/​burning;
  • affects mainly dorsum tongue;
  • filiform papillae may be lost;
  • tongue appears smooth and red, often with macules or petechiae;
  • if denture stomatitis, screen for underlying conditions, e.g. DM.

Group 2—​secondary oral candidoses
Rare group of immunological disorders with superficial mucocutaneous
candidosis, which can affect skin, nails, and oral mucosa.
•	Usually thick, white, oral plaques that cannot be removed.
• May develop endocrine abnormalities in time, such as thymic aplasia,
  candidosis endocrinopathy syndrome.
Investigation
• Oral swabs from three separate sites.
• Candidal rinse: may need to type species, particularly if poor response
  to initial treatment.
• Biopsy: mandatory if chronic hyperplasic candidiasis considered.
• Check FBC and haematinics.
• Medical investigation for underlying systemic condition.
Treatment
• OHI/​denture hygiene.
• Antifungal therapy:
  • polyenes, e.g. nystatin topically;
  • imidazoles, e.g. miconazole (has anti-​staphylococcal action, therefore
     use for angular cheilitis), clotrimazole topically, ketoconazole (multiple
     drug interactions therefore not first-​line therapy);
  • triazoles, e.g. fluconazole (beware of multiple drug interactions
     including with warfarin).
• Eliminate risk factors.
• May need long-​term treatment for chronic hyperplastic candidosis.
502



      502    Chapter      Oral medicine


            Trigeminal neuralgia
            Definition
            Disorder of the cranial nerve V l intense paroxysmal pain within one or
            more divisions of its sensory supply.
            Epidemiology
            3–​6:100,000, more common in ♀, incidence and severity increase with age.
            Usual age of onset 50–​70 years.
            Cause
            • Compression of trigeminal nerve root by artery in middle cranial fossa.
            •	Nerve demyelination—​may suggest multiple sclerosis especially in those
              <50 years.
            • Always suspect space-​occupying lesion, especially if <50 years of age.
            Clinical
            • Paroxysmal pain within one of the three divisions of cranial nerve V,
              usually maxillary or mandibular divisions.
            • Intense, lancinating, burning pain, ‘like an electric shock’.
            • Pain lasts seconds to minutes only.
            • Frequency varies, may be multiple times/​hour.
            • Almost always unilateral.
            • Many patients have a trigger point for their pain, which may be
              stimulated by everyday tasks such as eating, talking, and washing.
            • Patients have periods of remission and relapse, but symptoms tend to
              worsen over time.
            •	Neurological examination shows no clinical abnormality.
            Investigation
            • Full neurological examination (look for signs/​symptoms of multiple
              sclerosis).
            • MRI brain if:
              • atypical features;
              • patient <40 years old—​possible underlying demyelinating disease or
                 intracranial space-​occupying lesion;
              • considering microvascular decompression.

            Medical management
            • Carbamazepine started as 100mg twice daily up to 1600mg/​day—​first-​
              line treatment. Only licensed treatment in UK.
            • Early troublesome side effects reduce with time.
            • Monitor white cell count, urea and electrolytes, and liver function tests.
            •	Requires close follow-​up and trial reductions of therapy once
              symptom free.
            • Failure of carbamazepine—​anticonvulsants such as phenytoin,
              lamotrigine, gabapentin alone or in combination. NICE guidelines—​
              specialist only to commence these treatments.
                                              Trigeminal neuralgia           503


Surgical management
• Peripheral procedures, e.g. cryotherapy falling out of favour and being
  replaced by radiofrequency ablation to affected branch under LA/​GA.
  In the elderly infirm, local nerve ablative procedures retain a role.
• Central neurosurgical procedures:
  • open microvascular decompression—​artery causing nerve
     compression is separated from nerve using Teflon® sheet (5% risk of a
     serious complication including cranial nerve palsies);
  • radiofrequency rhizotomy—​Gasserian ganglion;
  • glycerol injection;
  • balloon compression;
  • stereotactic (Gamma Knife®) radiosurgery.
• All of these carry risks of permanent paraesthesia, anaesthesia dolorosa
  (severe continuous pain within the distribution of the nerve), and
  risks associated with the surgical procedure itself. Therefore, they are
  reserved for cases refractive to medical management or where medical
  management side effects are intolerable.
504



      504    Chapter      Oral medicine


            Glossopharyngeal neuralgia
            Definition
            Disorder of the glossopharyngeal nerve l intense paroxysmal pain with its
            area of sensory supply.
            Epidemiology
            Very rare. Incidence of trigeminal neuralgia:glossopharyngeal neuralgia
            is 100:1.
            Clinical
            • Pain similar in character to trigeminal neuralgia.
            • Often poorly localized. Affects tonsil, tongue base, ear, and
              intra-​auricular area.
            • Patients will often point to just behind the angle of the mandible.
              Symptoms have often been treated as TMJ pain for some time.
            • Trigger point difficult to identify—​may be swallowing or yawning.
            Investigation
            • Topical LA to ipsilateral tonsil/​pharynx immediately relieves symptoms
              but short-​acting, therefore diagnostic only, not therapeutic.
            • MRI scan: may be underlying space-​occupying lesion in the cranial cavity
              or at the jugular foramen.
            Treatment
            • Medical management as for trigeminal neuralgia: pain control may be
              difficult.
                                                                Migraine        505


Migraine
Definition
Primary recurrent headache disorder, more common in ♀, which usually
commences on approaching adolescence.
Cause
Possibly related to abnormal 5-​HT (serotonin) activity, leading initially to
vasoconstriction of portions of cerebral arteries, followed by compensa-
tory vasodilation, with cerebral oedema and pain. Postulated relationship
with TMJDS. Precipitants include:
• Hormonal factors, including OCP.
• Dietary, e.g. chocolate, bananas.
• Stress.
• Sleep deprivation.
• Bright/​flashing lights.
Clinical
• May have preceding aura lasting 5–​60 minutes: visual hallucinations
  including flashing coloured lights, loss of colour perception, or other
  visual disturbances; numbness/​dysaesthesia.
• Motor—​temporary muscle palsies.
• Speech disorders including aphasia.
• Severe, usually unilateral headache: initially poorly localized; becomes
  localized to temporal, frontal, or orbital region.
• Photophobia.
•	Nausea.
• Vomiting.
• Last 4–​72h.
• Attacks decrease in frequency with age and may totally resolve.
Treatment
• Acute attack: analgesics, sumatriptan (5-​HT antagonist).
• Prophylaxis: options include pizotifen, propranolol, topiramate, consider
  amitriptyline.
• Botulinum toxin type A—​NICE guidelines recommend only if failed
  three previous medications and have headaches for at least 15 days/​
  month, of which at least 8 days are migrainous.
• If no response to prophylaxis, NICE suggests offering up to ten sessions
  of acupuncture.
506



      506       Chapter    Oral medicine


            Cluster headaches
            Definition
            Recurrent headaches, also known as migrainous neuralgia and Horton’s
            syndrome. Either episodic—​clusters separated by 1 month or more, or
            chronic—​separated by less than a month or not separated at all.
            Epidemiology
            •   Less common than migraines, ♂:♀ 6:1.
            •   Often positive family history.
            •   80% of patients smoke.
            •   Presents in third or fourth decade.
            Cause
            •	Unknown. Possible trigeminal-​autonomic reflex mediated through the
              sphenopalatine ganglion.
            • Associated with:
              • sleep apnoea and d O2 saturations;
              • hypoxaemia in rapid eye movement (REM) sleep;
              • alcohol, cocaine;
              • glyceryl trinitrate spray.

            Clinical
            • Severe, unilateral episodes of burning or lancinating pain, in and around
              the orbit, frontal, and temporal region.
            • Abrupt onset, lasts for 15 minutes to 3h, often awakens the patient
              at night.
            • Begin at same time every day (‘alarm clock’ headaches).
            • May have multiple episodes each day.
            • Occur for 2–​3 months, then have periods of remission that can last
              for years.
            • May be associated autonomic problems:
              • conjunctival vessel congestion;
              • eye watering;
              • nasal stuffiness;
              • facial flushing.

            Investigation
            Diagnosis is clinical. However, similar symptoms may be secondary to intra-
            cranial pathology, so consider MRI scan of the brain.
            Treatment
            • Acute attack:
              • O2 may abort an attack and its effectiveness is diagnostic;
              • sumatriptan.
            • Prophylaxis—​specialist clinics:
              • verapamil;
              • nifedipine;
              • indomethacin.
            •	Neurostimulation device to stimulate sphenopalatine ganglion if medical
              management failed.
Cluster headaches   507
508



      508    Chapter       Oral medicine


            Temporal (giant cell) arteritis
            Definition
            Multifocal vasculitis affecting the cranial arteries, of unknown aetiology, with
            average age of onset 70 years. Most common in ♀ >50 years and related
            to polymyalgia rheumatica. ?Genetic predisposition.
            Clinical
            •	Unilateral headache, initially burning in character, becoming throbbing.
            •	Usually temporal or occipital artery.
            • Lingual, facial, and maxillary arteries may also become involved with
              claudication on eating and talking.
            • Affected vessels feel hard and tender and may necrose.
            • Tongue may become ischaemic if lingual arteries involved.
            • If untreated, 25% will develop visual problems secondary to central
              retinal artery involvement, which may be bilateral. Loss of vision may be
              the first clinical sign.
            • May have systemic symptoms such as fatigue, weight loss, flu-​like
              symptoms.
            Investigation
            • Significantly raised ESR: 60–​100 (may be less).
            • CRP also raised.
            •	Normocytic, normochromic anaemia.
            •	USS may be diagnostic of giant cell arteritis.
            • Artery biopsy (Fig. 11.10):
              • usually superficial temporal under LA;
              • can be ipsilateral or contralateral to symptomatic side;
              • giant cell lesions seen;
              • need to harvest >2cm as skip lesions can occur;
              • should be carried out within a week of starting steroids.




            Fig. .0 Temporal artery biopsy.
                                  Temporal (giant cell) arteritis           509


Treatment
• 60–​100mg prednisolone daily.
• Start before temporal artery biopsy with aim to preserve vision.
• Treatment in conjunction with rheumatologists.
• Proton pump inhibitor and osteoporosis cover with high-​dose steroids.
• Decrease steroid dose with resolution of headache and normalization
  ESR (may take months or years).
• Tocilizumab (a monoclonal antibody targeting IL-​6) was approved
  by NICE in 2017 and results in steroid sparing. It is expensive and is
  currently only approved for cases of relapsing or refractory giant cell
  arteritis.
051



      510    Chapter      Oral medicine


            Persistent idiopathic facial pain
            Definition
            Previously known as atypical facial pain.
              Diagnosis of exclusion. Constant, chronic pain in the absence of identifi-
            able organic disease. ♂ = ♀ but ♀ more commonly seek treatment. Most
            patients are middle-​aged or elderly.
            Clinical
            • International Headache Society defines persistent idiopathic facial
              pain as:
              • pain in the face;
              • present daily and persists most of the day;
              • pain is confined at onset to limited area on one side of the face and is
                 deep and poorly localized;
              • no sensory loss or other physical signs, with no abnormalities in
                 imaging or laboratory studies.
            • Often difficult for patients to describe their symptoms.
            • Most frequently described as deep, constant ache or burning.
            • Does not stop patients sleeping, but they often awake early with the
              pain present.
            • Does not follow anatomical patterns:
              • may be bilateral;
              • can cross midline;
            • Maxilla > mandible.
            • Often initiated/​exacerbated by dental treatment.
            • Often have other conditions, such as irritable bowel syndrome, dry
              mouth, and chronic pain syndromes.
            Investigation
            All imaging (including intracranial MRI), bloods, and biopsies normal.
            Treatment
            • Often unrewarding with limited response.
            • Tricyclic antidepressants have some effect in some patients (no
              adequate RCTs show this). Other antidepressants usually ineffective.
            • ~30% will respond to gabapentin.
            • The involvement of a pain team with access to cognitive behavioural
              therapy or psychological input may help patients manage their pain.
                                          Burning mouth syndrome              511


Burning mouth syndrome
Definition
Burning sensation of oral mucosa, usually tongue, in absence of any identi-
fiable clinical abnormality or cause.
Epidemiology
Common (5:100,000, but can be much higher in middle-​aged and elderly
patients), ♀ > ♂.
Cause
Unknown, but hormonal factors, anxiety, and stress have been implicated.
Clinical
• Patients complain of dry mouth, with altered/​bad taste.
• Burning sensation affecting tongue and anterior palate and, less
  commonly, lips.
• May be aggravated by certain foods, or relieved by eating and drinking.
•	Usually bilateral.
• Does not wake patient but often present on awaking.
• Examination entirely normal.
Investigation
•	Need to rule out other aetiologies—​candida, LP.
• FBC and haematinics.
• Diabetes.
• Drug history.
• Denture problems.
• Causes of dry mouth.
• All clinical investigations, including bloods and swabs, are normal.
Treatment
•	Reassurance.
• Avoidance of stimulating factors.
• Occasionally patients may respond to tricyclic antidepressants or alpha
  lipoic acid.
• Cognitive behavioural therapy has been shown in RCTs to help patients
  manage their symptoms, as medical management is often disappointing.
Oral manifestations of Covid-​19
• The oral mucosa epithelial cells have a high concentration of ACE2
  receptors, thought to be a likely infection route for the virus.
• Loss of taste and smell are commonly reported.
• Oral ulceration has been reported in single cases-​the association is not
  yet confirmed.
251
 Chapter 2                   513



Eponyms in OMFS
List of eponyms in OMFS 514
451



      514    Chapter 2    Eponyms in OMFS


            List of eponyms in OMFS
            Abbe                Robert, US Surgeon 1851–​1928
                                Abbe flap: a pedicled full-​thickness flap of one lip
                                transferred into the other
            Addison             Thomas, British physician 1793–​1860
                                Addison disease: chronic adrenal insufficiency,
                                hypocortisolism, hypoadrenalism, and buccal mucosa
                                pigmentation
            Adson               Alfred Washington, US Neurosurgeon 1887–​1951
                                Adson tissue forceps
            Albers-​Schonberg   Heinrich Ernst, German radiologist 1865–​1921
                                Albers-​Schonberg disease: osteopetrosis
            Albright            Fuller, US endocrinologist 1900–​1969
                                Albright syndrome: precocious puberty, polyostotic
                                fibrous dysplasia, unilateral café-​au-​lait spots
            Allen               Edgar Van Nuys, US physician 1900–​1961
                                Allen’s test for radial or ulnar artery patency
            Apert               Eugene, French paediatrician 1868–​1940
                                Apert syndrome: type I acrocephalosyndactyly
            Battle              William H, English surgeon 1855–​1936
                                Battle’s sign: postauricular ecchymosis in # of middle
                                cranial fossa
            Behçet              Hulusi, Turkish dermatologist 1889–​1948
                                Behçet’s syndrome: uveitis, oral, and genital
                                ulceration
            Bell                Charles, Scottish anatomist 1774–​1842
                                Bell’s palsy: idiopathic unilateral facial nerve paralysis,
                                usually self-​limiting
            Binder              Karl Heinz, German dentist 1923–​unknown
                                Binder’s syndrome: nasomaxillary hypoplasia
            Bowen               John T, 1857–​1941
                                Bowen’s disease: cutaneous squamous intraepithelial
                                carcinoma
            Breslow             Alexander, US pathologist 1928–​1980
                                Breslow thickness: melanoma depth
            Burkitt             Denis P, British physician 1911–​1993
                                Burkitt’s lymphoma: EBV in African children
            Caldwell            George W, US physician 1834–​1918
                                Caldwell–​Luc approach via canine fossa to maxillary
                                sinus
            Carnoy              Jean Baptiste, French biologist 1836–​1899
                                Carnoy’s solution: a fixative used in keratocystic
                                odontogenic tumour management
                                     List of eponyms in OMFS           515


Castleman   Benjamin, US physician and pathologist 1906–​1982
            Castleman disease: uncommon lymphoproliferative
            disorder (not reactive lymph node hyperplasia or
            malignancy)
Chvostek    František, Czech-​Austrian physician 1835–​1884
            Chvostek’s sign: hypocalcaemia-​related tapping over
            facial nerve elicits abnormal muscle contraction(s)
Crohn       Burrill Bernard, US gastroenterologist 1884–​1983
            Crohn’s disease: inflammatory bowel disease, may
            affect any part of the gastrointestinal tract from
            mouth to anus
Crouzon     Octave, French physician 1874–​1938
            Crouzon syndrome: craniofacial dysostosis
DiGeorge    Angel Mario, US paediatrician 1921–​2009
            Di George syndrome: deficiency of third and fourth
            pharyngeal pouches, cellular immunodeficiency,
            overlap with VCF
Epstein     Alois, Czech paediatrician 1849–​1918
            Epstein’s pearls: cystic papules on palate
Erb         Wilhelm Heinrich, German neurologist 1840–​1921
            Erb’s point: where the great auricular nerve crosses
            the SCM
Estlander   Jacob, Finnish surgeon 1831–​1881
            Abbe–​Estlander flap: a full-​thickness flap reconstruc-
            tion of oral commissure
Fergusson   Sir William, Scottish surgeon 1808–​1877
            Weber–​Fergusson incision: facial access for
            maxillectomy
Frey        Lucie, Polish neurologist 1852–​1932
            Frey’s syndrome: gustatory sweating following par-
            otid surgery or trauma
Gardner     Eldon J, US physician 1909–​1989
            Gardner’s syndrome: variant of familial adenoma-
            tous polyposis with osteomas, neuromas, lipomas,
            polyposis coli
Gillies     Sir Harold, English maxillofacial/​plastic surgeon
            1882–​1960
            Gillies lift: surgical approach to closed zygomatic
            fracture reduction
            Also needle holder, tissue forceps, skin hooks
Goltz       Robert William, US dermatologist 1923–​2014
            Gorlin–​Goltz syndrome: multiple basal cell
            carcinomas, odontogenic keratocysts, skeletal
            abnormalities
651



      516    Chapter 2     Eponyms in OMFS

            Gorlin              Robert James, US oral pathologist 1923–​2006
                                Gorlin–​Goltz syndrome: multiple basal cell
                                carcinomas, odontogenic keratocysts, skeletal
                                abnormalities
            Guedel              Arthur Ernest, US anaesthetist 1883–​1956
                                Guedel airway
            Gunning             Thomas B, US dentist 1813–​1889
                                Gunning splints: modified dentures for use in jaw
                                fractures
            Hand–​Schüller–​    Alfred Hand Jr (US paediatrician 1868–​1949),
            Christian disease   Artur Schüller (Austrian neurologist and radiologist
                                1874–​1957), Henry Asbury Christian (US physician
                                1876–​1951)
                                Triad of exophthalmos, lytic bone lesions (often in
                                the skull) and diabetes insipidus
            Heck                John W, US dentist 1923–​unknown
                                Heck’s focal epithelial hyperplasia: PMOL
            Heerfordt           Christian Frederick, Danish ophthalmologist
                                1871–​1953
                                Heerfordt’s syndrome: facial palsy, uveitis, parotid
                                gland enlargement, fever (sarcoidosis)
            Hess                Carl von, German ophthalmologist 1863–​1923
                                Hess charting in ocular motility disorders
            Highmore            Nathaniel, English anatomist 1613–​1685
                                Maxillary antrum of Highmore
            Hilton              John, English surgeon 1804–​1878
                                Hilton’s method for draining pus
            Hodgkin             Thomas, English physician 1798–​1866
                                Hodgkin lymphoma
            Horner              Johan Friedrich, Swiss ophthalmologist 1831–​1886
                                Horner’s syndrome: ptosis, miosis, anhidrosis due to
                                lesion of cervical sympathetic chain
            Horton              Bayard T, US physician 1895–​1980
                                Horton’s neuralgia: cluster headache
            Hounsfield          Godfrey N, English electronics engineer and Nobel
                                Laureate 1919–​2004
                                Hounsfield units: index of X-​ray attenuation in CT
                                scanning
            Hunt                James Ramsay, US neurologist 1872–​1937
                                Ramsay Hunt syndrome: facial palsy secondary to
                                herpes zoster, vesicles in EAM, otalgia, deafness,
                                vertigo
            Hutchinson          Sir Jonathan, English surgeon 1828–​1913
                                Hutchinson’s melanotic freckle: lentigo maligna
                                     List of eponyms in OMFS           517


Kaposi       Moritz, Hungarian dermatologist 1837–​1902
             Kaposi sarcoma: tumour of endothelial cells
Kelly        Adam, English ENT surgeon 1865–​1941
             Paterson–​Brown-​Kelly/​Plummer–​Vinson syn-
             drome: post-​cricoid web, atrophic glossitis,
             sideropenic dysphagia
Koebner      Heinrich, German dermatologist 1838–​1904
             Koebner phenomenon: skin lesions occurring in area
             of trauma
Koplik       Henry, US paediatrician 1858–​1927
             Koplik’s spots: prodromic viral enanthem of measles
Lahey        Frank, US surgeon 1880–​1935
             Lahey pledgets: used in blunt dissection
Langenbeck   Bernhard von, German surgeon 1810–​1887
             Langenbeck retractor
             Von Langenbeck cleft palate repair
Le Fort      Rene, French surgeon 1869–​1951
             Le Fort levels of maxillary fracture
Luc          Henri, French ENT surgeon 1855–​1925
             Caldwell–​Luc approach via canine fossa to maxillary
             sinus
Ludwig       Wilhelm Friedich von, German surgeon 1790–​1865
             Ludwig’s angina: bilateral sublingual and subman-
             dibular cellulitis
Malassez     Louis Charles, French physiologist 1842–​1910
             Epithelial cell rests of Malassez: remnants of the root
             sheath of Hertwig
Mohs         Frederick E, US surgeon 1910–​2002
             Mohs micrographic surgery
Moon         Henry, English dentist 1845–​1892
             Moon’s mulberry molars in congenital syphilis
Noonan       Jacqueline, US paediatric cardiologist 1928–​
             Noonan described the syndrome in 1963. The con-
             dition was first described in 1883
Paget        Sir James, English surgeon 1814–​1899
             Paget’s disease of bone: osteitis deformans
Paterson     Donald Rose, English ENT surgeon 1863–​1939
             Paterson–​Brown-​Kelly/​Plummer–​Vinson syn-
             drome: post-​cricoid web, atrophic glossitis,
             sideropenic dysphagia
Pfeiffer     Richard FJ, German physician 1858–​1945
             Pfeiffer syndrome: acrocephalosyndactyly
851



      518    Chapter 2      Eponyms in OMFS

            Plummer             Henry Stanley, US endocrinologist 1874–​1936
                                Paterson–​Brown-​Kelly/​Plummer–​Vinson syn-
                                drome: post-​cricoid web, atrophic glossitis,
                                sideropenic dysphagia
            Pott                Percivall, English surgeon 1714–​1788
                                Pott’s puffy tumour: osteomyelitis of frontal
                                bone and intracranial abscess, direct or through
                                haematogenic spread
            Ramsay Hunt         James, 1872–​1937
                                Ramsay Hunt syndrome, see Hunt
            Recklinghausen      Daniel von, German pathologist 1833–​1910
                                Recklinghausen’s neurofibromatosis
                                Von Recklinghausen disease of bone: osteitis fibrosa
                                cystica in secondary hyperparathyroidism
            Reed                Dorothy M, US pathologist 1874–​1964
                                Reed–​Sternberg cells in Hodgkin lymphoma
            Rinne               Friedrich, German otologist 1819–​1868
                                Rinne test of hearing with tuning fork
            Romberg             Mortiz, Heinrich von, German physician 1795–​1873
                                Romberg’s hemifacial atrophy
            Schirmer            Otto, German ophthalmologist 1864–​1918.
                                Schirmer’s test: quantifies lacrimal secretion
            Sézary              Albert, French dermatologist 1880–​1956
                                Sézary syndrome: cutaneous T-​cell lymphoma
            Shiley              Donald P, US engineer 1920–​2010
                                Shiley tracheostomy tube
            Sistrunck           Walter Ellis, US surgeon 1880–​1933
                                Sistrunck’s procedure for excision of thyroglossal cysts
            Sjögren             Henrik Samuel, Swedish ophthalmologist 1899–​1986
                                Sjögren’s syndrome: xerophthalmia, xerostomia,
                                CTD
            Spee                Ferdinand Graf von, German embryologist
                                1855–​1937
                                Curve of Spee: AP curve of occlusal plane
            Spitz               Sophie, US pathologist 1910–​1956
                                Spitz naevus: red skin tumour mistaken for melanoma
            Stafne              Edward C, US oral pathologist 1894–​1981
                                Stafne bone cavity: ectopic submandibular salivary
                                tissue
            Stevens–​Johnson    Albert Mason Stevens, US surgeon 1884–​1945,
                                Frank Chambliss Johnson, US pediatrician 1894–​1934
                                Stevens–​Johnson syndrome: hypersensitivity com-
                                plex affecting skin and mucous membranes
                                            List of eponyms in OMFS           519


Stensen            Stensen’s duct named after Nicolas Steno (1638–​
                   1686), a Danish anatomist credited with its detailed
                   description in 1660
Sturge             William Allen, English physician 1850–​1919
                   Sturge–​Weber syndrome: facial haemangioma in V
                   distribution, meningeal angioma, intracranial calcifica-
                   tion, epilepsy
Treacher Collins   Edward, English surgeon and ophthalmologist
                   1862–​1932
                   Treacher Collins syndrome (mandibulofacial
                   dysostosis): rare autosomal dominant congenital dis-
                   order characterized by craniofacial deformities
Vincent            Henri, French physician 1862–​1950
                   Vincent’s angina: acute necrotizing ulcerative
                   gingivitis
Vinson             Porter Paisley, US surgeon 1890–​1959
                   Paterson–​Brown-​Kelly/​Plummer–​Vinson syn-
                   drome: post-​cricoid web, atrophic glossitis,
                   sideropenic dysphagia
Virchow            Rudolf, German pathologist 1821–​1902
                   Virchow’s triad in thrombosis formation
Waldeyer           Heinrich G von, German anatomist 1836–​1921
                   Waldeyer’s oropharyngeal ring of lymphoid tissue
Weber              Frederick Parks, English physician 1863–​1962
                   Sturge–​Weber syndrome: facial haemangioma in V
                   distribution, meningeal angioma, intracranial calcifica-
                   tion, epilepsy
Weber              Friedrich, German otologist 1823–​1891
                   Weber–​Fergusson incision: facial access for
                   maxillectomy
                   Weber test of hearing with tuning fork
Wegener            Friedrich, German pathologist 1907–​1990
                   Wegener’s granulomatosis vasculitis causing damage
                   to lung kidneys skin and face (midline)
Whickham           Louis, French dermatologist 1861–​1913
                   Whickham’s striae in lichen planus
Whitehead          Walter, English surgeon 1840–​1913
                   Whitehead’s varnish
Whitnall           Samuel E, English anatomist 1876–​1952
                   Whitnall’s tubercle: suspensory point for lateral can-
                   thus and suspensory ligament of globe
520



      520    Chapter 2   Eponyms in OMFS

            Wharton          Wharton’s duct (duct of the submandibular salivary
                             gland) first described by Alessandro Achillini (1463–​
                             1512) in 1500, but was rediscovered by Wharton
                             in 1656
            Wolfe            John R, Scottish ophthalmologist 1824–​1904
                             Wolfe graft: full-​thickness skin graft
            Yankauer         Sidney, US otolaryngologist 1872–​1932
                             Yankauer suction developed around 1907
 Chapter 3                                             521



Other useful facts
Potions 522
Uses of botulinum toxin in OMFS 523
Statistics 524
The infratemporal fossa 525
Levels of critical care 526
Ionizing Radiation (Medical Exposure) Regulations 527
Piezoelectric surgery in OMFS 528
Wound care and surgical wound dressings 529
Revalidation for the new consultant 530
Some key points regarding facial transplantation 531
52



     522       Chapter 3   Other useful facts


           Potions
           Carnoy’s solution
           • 6 parts ethanol (absolute or 95%).
           • 3 parts chloroform.
           • 1 part glacial acetic acid.
           Uses
           • Reducing recurrence in odontogenic keratocysts.
           •	Applied to bony cavity following enucleation for 3min.
           • Causes fixation of peripheral nerves due to neurotoxicity of ingredients.
           Whitehead’s varnish
           •   Iodoform.
           •   Ether.
           •   Balsam of tolu.
           •   Benzoin.
           •   Storax.
           Tumescent solution
           An example:
           •	Hartmann’s solution (cold)—​500mL.
           •	Hyalase—​1mL.
           •	Adrenaline 1:1000—​0.5mL.
           • Bupivacaine 0.25%—​25mL.
           • Lidocaine 1%—​25mL.
           • (Triamcinolone.)
           Uses
           • E.g. bitemporal flap, face lift, neck dissection.
                                 Uses of botulinum toxin in OMFS                523


Uses of botulinum toxin in OMFS
(Doses relate to Botox® (Allergan).)
• Anti-​wrinkle injections (see % Non-​surgical aesthetic techniques,
  p. 354).
• Blepharospasm: 25 units in 10 divided doses to medial and lateral lids.
• Frey’s syndrome: 5 units intradermally at 1cm distances.
• Masseteric hypertrophy: 25 units into masseter.
• Sialorrhoea/​drooling: to submandibular/​parotid glands up to 70
  units total.
• Chronic parotid sialadenitis: to avoid surgery.
• TMJ pain dysfunction/​dislocation: into masseters/​lateral pterygoid
  muscles ± temporalis, up to 80 units each side.
• Postoperative sialocoele/​salivary fistula: parotidectomy—​emerging
  evidence.
• Migrainous headaches.
• Cervical dystonia (torticollis).
Note that botulinum toxin acts by binding to high-​affinity recognition sites
on presynaptic cholinergic nerve terminals and thus decreases the release
of acetylcholine. This results in neuroeffector blocking. When used in to
a salivary gland such as the parotid, the neuroeffector junction affected is
between the postganglionic parasympathetic nerve and the salivary tissue.
Cranial nerve VII function is not affected.
524



      524    Chapter 3      Other useful facts


            Statistics
            Sensitivity and specificity
            Sensitivity
            How good a test is at identifying those who have the disease.
            Specificity
            How good a test is at identifying those who do not have the disease.
            Useful terms
            • True positives: those with a positive test result who do have the disease.
            • True negatives: those with a negative test result who do not have the
              disease.
            • False positives: those with a positive test result who do not have the
              disease.
            • False negatives: those with a negative test result who do have the
              disease.
            •	A sensitive test will therefore have few false negatives.
            •	A specific test will have few false positives.
            For example, MRI of the neck in detection of nodal metastasis:
            • Sensitivity is 75–​80% (i.e. not very sensitive). It therefore has a significant
              number of false negatives. These are the nodes with micrometastasis
              that do not show up on MRI.
              • Sensitivity = No. true positives/​(No. true positives + No. false
                  negatives)
            • Specificity is 90–​100%. It has few false positives, i.e. those nodes that
              fit the radiological criteria for metastatic disease nearly always show
              disease at histology.
              • Specificity = No. true negatives/​(No. true negatives + No. false
                  positives)
            • The positive predictive value is the proportion of patients with positive
              test results who are correctly diagnosed:
              • PPV = No. true positives/​(No. true positives + No. false positives)
                                            The infratemporal fossa            525


The infratemporal fossa
• The infratemporal fossa is an irregularly shaped cavity, situated below
  and medial to the zygomatic arch.
• It was previously called the pterygomaxillary space.
Boundaries
These consist of the following structures:
• Anteriorly: by the infratemporal surface of the maxilla and the ridge,
  which descends from its zygomatic process.
• Posteriorly: by the articular eminence of the temporal bone and the
  spinal angularis of the sphenoid bone.
• Superiorly: by the greater wing of the sphenoid below the infratemporal
  crest and the under-​surface of the squamous temporal bone.
• Inferiorly: by the alveolar border of the maxilla.
• Medially: by the lateral pterygoid plate.
• Laterally: by the ramus of mandible.
• It has no floor.
Contents
Muscles
• The lower part of the temporalis muscle.
• Lateral and medial pterygoid muscles.
Vessels
• The internal maxillary vessels, consisting of the maxillary artery
  originating from the external carotid artery and its branches.
• Internal maxillary branches found within the infratemporal fossa
  including:
  • middle meningeal artery;
  • inferior alveolar artery;
  • deep temporal artery;
  • buccal artery;
  • pterygoid venous plexus.

Nerves
Mandibular nerve, inferior alveolar nerve, lingual nerve, buccal nerve,
chorda tympani nerve, and otic ganglion.
Fissures
• The foramen ovale and foramen spinosum open on its roof, and the
   alveolar canals on its anterior wall.
•	At its upper and medial part are two fissures, which together form a T-​
   shaped fissure comprised of the inferior orbital and the pterygomaxillary
   fissure.
526



      526    Chapter 3     Other useful facts


            Levels of critical care
            • Level 0: patients whose needs can be met through normal ward care in
              an acute hospital.
            • Level 1: patients at risk of their condition deteriorating, or those
              recently relocated from higher levels of care whose needs can be met
              on an acute ward, with additional advice and support from the critical
              care team.
            • Level 2: patients requiring more detailed observation or intervention,
              including support for a single failing organ system or postoperative care,
              and those stepping down from higher levels of care.
            • Level 3: patients requiring advanced respiratory support alone or
              basic respiratory support, together with support of at least two organ
              systems. This level includes all complex patients requiring support for
              multiorgan failure.
          Ionizing Radiation (Medical Exposure) Regulations                             527


Ionizing Radiation (Medical Exposure)
Regulations
The Ionizing Radiation (Medical Exposure) Regulations (IRMER) 2017 are
statutory regulations.
   Designated members of the team include:
• Legal person to take overall responsibility.
• Radiation protection supervisor.
• IRMER practitioner who must justify risks vs benefits.
• Radiation protection advisor.
Radiation must be kept as low as reasonably practical (ALARP; Table 13.1):
•	All exposure must be justified.
•	A record of clinical evaluation must be kept.
• Radiographs should be provided to other practitioners.
• Quality should be audited.

Table 3. Radiation doses of common imaging investigations in OMFS
Examination                                                      Effective dose (μSv)
Intraoral radiograph (per exposure)                              <8.3
Dental panoramic radiograph                                      9–​26
Dental cephalometric radiograph                                  3–​6
CBCT (dentoalveolar) (focus field of view)                       5–​38.3
Full-​mouth series                                               35–​388
CBCT (craniofacial)                                              68–​599
Medical fan beam CT scan (maxilla and mandible)                  2000
Reprinted from Stuart White & Michael Pharoah (2008) Oral Radiology: Principles and
Interpretation: Elsevier, with permission from Elsevier.
528



      528    Chapter 3     Other useful facts


            Piezoelectric surgery in OMFS
            • Piezoelectric surgery uses ultrasonic microvibrations for the cutting
              of bone.
            • Precise bone cuts are made without damaging any soft tissue, minimizing
              the invasiveness of surgical procedure.
            • It results in an almost totally blood-​free field.
            • Compared to traditional methods, it enables optimal healing because it
              reduces the post-​surgery swelling and discomfort.
            • Uses: OMFS, ENT, neurosurgery, ophthalmology, traumatology, and
              orthopaedics.
            The main indications in oral surgery are sinus lift, bone graft harvesting,
            osteogenic distraction, ridge expansion, endodontic surgery, periodontal
            surgery, inferior alveolar nerve decompression, and cyst and impacted teeth
            removal.
                 Wound care and surgical wound dressings                    529


Wound care and surgical
wound dressings
Problem: bleeding
• Cause:
  • fragile vascular condition and capillary ooze in fungating wounds;
  • dry dressings traumatize the friable tissues.
• Prevention: tranexamic acid 10-​day oral course or applied topically.
• Management:
  • enough moisture to prevent adherence of dressings;
  • Kaltostat® or similar calcium alginate;
  • palliative radiotherapy—​either a single fraction or short course;
  • administer blood transfusion if indicated and patient is symptomatic.

Problem: malodour
• Cause: fatty acids a by-​product of necrotic tissue within the wound
  leading to malodour or due to bacterial infection.
• Prevention:
  • patient education;
  • essential oils infusers, metronidazole gel, or oral antibiotics.
• Management:
  • dressings that absorb odour;
  • changing dressings when strike-​through occurs;
  • autolytic debridement of necrotic tissue—​honey (antibacterial
     properties) or Aquacel®.
Problem: pain
• Cause: general cancer burden in advanced disease or wound position.
• Prevention: skin barrier—​Cavilon™ to prevent tapes sticking.
• Management:
  • continuous analgesia and break-​through dose at change of dressing;
  • psychosocial support;
  • sometimes palliative radiotherapy.

Problem: heavy exudates
• Cause: large fungating tumours in advanced stage.
• Prevention: absorption via appropriate dressings.
• Management:
  • challenging shapes—​foam dressings hold excess moisture and prevent
    maceration;
  • excessive—​stoma bag system.
530



      530    Chapter 3     Other useful facts


            Revalidation for the new consultant
            Essentials
            •	GMC online account.
            • Know your designated body or responsible officer.
            •	Annual appraisal process in line with the GMC’s Good Medical Practice.
            • The measurement of surgical outcomes is being introduced in the NHS
              across all surgical specialities.
            General information about you and your professional work
            • Personal details, scope of work, and record of annual appraisals.
            • Personal development plans and their review.
            • Probity and health.
            Keeping up to date—​continuing professional development
            • Review of practice.
            • Quality improvement activity—​audit, review of outcomes, case review,
              and discussion.
            • Significant events—​clinical incidents, significant untoward incidents
              (SUIs), or other similar events.
            Feedback on professional practice
            • Colleague feedback.
            • Patient and carer feedback.
            • Complaints and compliments.
         Some key points regarding facial transplantation                  531


Some key points regarding facial
transplantation
Type of facial transplantation
• Upper/​lower/​full face.
• Soft tissue only or composite.
Procedure
• Timing and sequencing of surgery.
• Complex procedure involving multiple teams.
• Sentinel graft—​indirect monitoring for rejection.
Donor reconstruction
• Prosthetics laboratory.
Immunosuppression problems
•	Acute rejection and sepsis.
• Infections and cancers.
• Emerging evidence of tacrolimus benefits in nerve function.
Quality of life
• Recovery of facial movements ~9–​12 months.
• Sensory recovery ~3–​6 months.
•	Aesthetics variable and secondary cosmetic procedures required.
• Function depends on motor recovery and complexity of composite
  reconstruction.
Ethical implications
• Is it appropriate to offer a high-​risk procedure and life-​long
  immunosuppression for a non-​life-​threatening condition?
• To the patient, facial disfigurement is life limiting and affects QOL.
• Trauma, burns, and benign tumours vs malignant tumours.
532
                                                                                                     533


           Index
Note: Tables, figures, and boxes are indicated by t, f, and b following the page number

A                               analgesic ladder
                                    (WHO) 137–​8
                                                                  blepharoplasty 360–​3, 360f
                                                                  body dysmorphic
abscess, dental 424             aneurysmal bone cysts 431             disorder 214
acral lentiginous               angular cheilitis 501             body osteotomy 261, 262f
     melanoma 160               ankylosis 390–​1, 390f, 391f      bone
actinic keratosis 148           anterolateral thigh flap 97         cherubism (familial fibrous
actinomycosis 428               antibiotic prophylaxis                  dysplasia) 437
acute maxillary sinusitis 446     infective endocarditis 408–​9     cysts 431–​2
acute necrotizing ulcerative      trauma 16                         fibrous dysplasia 437
     gingivitis 488             anticoagulants 409–​10              grafts 91–​2
adenoameloblastoma 435          antiplatelets 409–​10               healing 32
adenomatoid odontogenic         Apert syndrome 294                  hyperparathyroidism 437
     tumour 435                 aphthous ulcers 456–​7              Paget’s disease (osteitis
advanced trauma life            apical dental abscess 424               deformans) 437
     support 4                  apicectomy 418–​19                  scintigraphy 74
aesthetics,                     Apnoea–​Hypopnoea                   tumours 436
     non-​surgical 354–​9           Index 284                       see also fractures
aesthetic surgery               arteriovenous                     botulinum toxin 354–​6, 354–​5f,
  blepharoplasty 360–​3, 360f       malformations 309                 505, 523
  brow lift 363–​4, 364f        arthrocentesis 386                box osteotomy 302–​3
  cheiloplasty 372–​3, 373f     arthroscopy 386                   brachytherapy 112
  Colman fat technique 369      ASA grading 404                   branchial cyst 442
  definition 352                aspiration 127, 128–​9            Breslow thickness 162
  facelift                      aspirin 410                       brow lift 363–​4, 364f
       (rhytidectomy) 366–​9    atypical facial pain 510          brow ptosis 361, 363
  implants 369–​70              atypical fibroxanthoma 166–​7     BSSO 215–​16f, 254–​7,
  liposuction 369               AVPU 12                               255f, 273
  medicolegal issues 374        avulsed teeth 58                  buccal advancement flap 447
  otoplasty 364–​6                                                buccal fat pad flap 447
  patient assessment and                                          buccal reconstruction 102
       selection 353            B                                 bulla 144
  regulations 374–​5            Bardach double flap 329           bullous pemphigoid 468
  rhinoplasty 370–​2            barium swallow 72                 burning mouth
  training 375                  basal cell carcinoma                  syndrome 511
AIDS 486                            152–​5, 152f
airway                          Battle’s sign 19
  obstruction, oral cancer      Behçet’s syndrome 460–​1          C
       106, 139                 Bell’s palsy 444                  calcifying epithelial
  peri-​surgical                Bell’s phenomenon 361                 otodontogenic tumour 435
       management 405           benign mucous membrane            calcifying odontogenic
  surgical 6–​8, 7f, 406            pemphigoid 468–​9                 cysts 431
  trauma 6–​8, 7f               Bergland scale 331                cancrum oris 488
Albright’s syndrome 437         betel quid chewing 66             candidal infections 500–​1
alcohol 66                      bilateral sagittal split          canine impaction 419
alloplastic implants 370            osteotomy 215–​16f,           cantholysis 15
alveolus                            254–​7, 255f, 273             canthotomy 15
  bone graft in cleft lip and   biopsy 429                        capillary malformations 308
       palate 330–​4, 330f      bisphosphonates 410               Carnoy’s solution 522
  dentoalveolar fractures 58    bleeding                          carotid angiography 72
  dentoalveolar                   oral cancer surgery 105         carotid body tumour 443
       surgery 414–​20            palliative care 140             cartilage grafts 92
ameloblastic fibroma 435          postoperative 410               cat scratch disease 428
ameloblastoma 434                 trauma 10–​11                   cementomas 434
anaesthesia 402–​7                wound care 529                  CEOT 435
534



      534    INDEX


            cephalometrics 222–​5,         Colman fat technique 369         craniosynostosis
                 223f, 225–​6t, 226f,      comedone 144                         290, 291–​6
                 227t, 285, 288f           complex synostosis 291           cricothyroidotomy 6–​8, 9f
            cervical lymph nodes 440–​2    compound naevus 144              critical care, levels of 526
            cervical rib 443               computed tomography              Crohn’s disease 498
            cheiloplasty 372–​3, 373f        oral cancer 72, 73f            Crouzon syndrome 294
            chemical peels 358–​9            trauma 5, 13, 24               crust 144
            chemotherapy 116–​17           condyle                          CSF rhinorrhoea 21
              swallowing problems 127        fracture 38–​9                 cutaneous horn 144
            cherubism 437                    post-​orthognathic             cutaneous melanoma 160–​5,
            chest radiograph 71                  surgery 267–​8                 161f, 164f
            chickenpox 480                   resorption 274,                cystic hygroma 308
            chronic maxillary                    395, 395–​6f               cysts
                 sinusitis 446               shave 387                        neck 442
            chylous leakage 106            cone beam CT 24                    oral 430–​2
            cicatricial pemphigoid 468     congenital syphilis 493
            cinch sutures 270, 271f        connective tissue
            cleft lip and palate 315–​50       tumours 435                  D
              aetiology 317                consultant                       deep circumflex iliac artery
              alveolar bone graft              revalidation 530                 flap 99–​101, 101f
                   330–​4, 330f            continuing professional          deltopectoral flap 93
              chromosome                       development 530              dental injuries 58
                   abnormalities 317       contrast radiography 71–​2       dental osseointegrated
              diagnosis 318–​20            coronectomy 416–​17                  implants 448–​51
              distraction                  craniofacial clefting dis-       dentigerous cysts 430
                   osteogenesis 342–​3         orders 290, 304–​5, 304f     dentoalveolar fractures 58
              eustachian tube              craniofacial microsomia 310      dentoalveolar
                   dysfunction 346         craniofacial surgery                 surgery 414–​20
              genetic                          289–​314                     denture stomatitis 501
                   counselling 319–​20       box osteotomy for              depression 109, 130
              hearing 346                        hypertelorism 302–​3       dermabrasion 357
              incidence 316                  classification 290             dermal fillers 356–​7
              in utero/​maternal             craniofacial clefting          dermal templates 172
                   factors 317                   disorders 290,             desquamative
              lip repair 322–​6, 323f,           304–​5, 304f                   gingivitis 464
                   324f, 325f                craniofacial tumours           diet, oral cancer risk 66
              lip revision 336                   290, 306                   diplopia 22, 363
              maxillary surgery 273          craniosynostosis               dislocation, TMJ
              nose repair 323,                   290, 291–​6                    392–​3, 393f
                   325, 340–​1               facial bipartition 302, 302f   distant flaps 93, 170
              oronasal fistula 337–​8        fronto-​orbital advance-       distraction osteogenesis
              orthodontics 348–​9                ment and cranial               276–​81, 277f, 278f,
              orthognathic                       remodelling 300                279f, 280f, 281f, 342–​3
                   surgery 342–​3            hemifacial                     distraction test 361
              otitis media with                  microsomia 310–​11         dorsal scapular flap 93
                   effusion 346              Le Fort III osteotomy 300      double vision 22, 363
              palate repair 328–​9, 328f     monoblock advancement          drug-​related parotid
              palate revision 336–​8             301–​2, 301f                   enlargement 193
              psychological                  multidisciplinary team 313     dry mouth 188
                   adjustment 350            organization of                dry socket 424
              revision                           services 314               dysphagia 127, 129, 139
                   procedures 336–​8         positional skull deformity
              speech 343–​5                      298–​9, 299f
              syndromic 316                  torticollis 298                E
              ultrasound                     Treacher Collins               ears
                   classification 318            syndrome 312                cleft lip and palate 346
              velopharyngeal incompe-        vascular                        otoplasty 364–​6
                   tence 336–​7, 344–​5          malformations 308–​9        surface anatomy 365f
            clopidogrel 410                craniofacial tumours              trauma 21
            closed lock 384                    290, 306                     eminectomy 387
            cluster headaches 506          craniofrontonasal                encephalocoeles 305
            cold sores 479                     dysplasia 305                endoscopic brow lift 364
                                                                                  INDEX        535

endotracheal                    fibula flap 97–​9, 98f            Functional Assessment of
    intubation 405              fillers 356–​7                       Cancer Therapy Scale
enophthalmos 49, 50             fine needle aspiration cy-           (FACT-​HNS) 133
enteral feeding 121–​2               tology/​biopsy               fungating tumours 139
EORTC QLQ Head and                 oral cancer 75                 Furlow double opposing
    Neck-​35 (QLQ–​H&N             salivary gland 186                Z-​plasty 329
    35) 133                     first and second arch
ephelide 144                         syndrome 310
eponyms 514                     fissural cysts 432                G
Epstein–​Barr virus 482–​3      fistula                           gastrostomy tube
Epworth Sleepiness Scale           complication of oral               feeding 121–​2
    284, 284b                           cancer surgery 107        general anaesthesia 404–​6
erysipelas 144                     oro-​antral 447                gene therapy 117
erythema migrans 477               oronasal 337–​8                genioplasty 264–​5,
erythema multiforme                salivary 197                       265f, 268
    470–​1, 470f                Fitzpatrick classification 145    giant cell arteritis
erythematous                    flaps 30, 92–​101, 169–​70,           508–​9, 508f
    candidosis 500                   170–​1f, 172f, 447           Gillie’s approach 46, 46f
erythroplakia 474                  failure 108                    gingival lacerations 20
eustachian tube                 fractures                         gingivitis
    dysfunction 346                condyle 38–​9                    acute necrotizing
exophthalmos 51                    dentoalveolar 58                     ulcerative 488
exudates 529                       edentulous mandible              desquamative 464
eye injuries 4, 14–​15, 22              36–​7, 37f                gingivoperiosteoplasty 331
eyelids                            frontal bone 52–​4,            gingivostomatitis,
  blepharoplasty 360–​3, 360f           53f, 54f                      primary 478
  trauma 28                        frontal sinus 52               Glasgow Coma Scale 12–​13
                                   guardsman’s 39                 glossopharyngeal
                                   healing 32                         neuralgia 504
F                                  Le Fort I 40, 40f              Goldenhar syndrome 310
face                               Le Fort II 40, 41f             Gorlin–​Golz syndrome 431
  age changes 352                  Le Fort III 40, 41f            grafts 29, 91–​2, 168–​9,
  bleeding/​haemorrhage 10         management principles 32           168f, 170
  fifths 217f                      mandible 21, 22,               granular cell
  growth 212–​13                        33–​9, 35f                    myoblastoma 435
  persistent idiopathic            maxilla 22, 47                 growth spurts 213, 213t
       pain 510                    mid-​face 40–​2, 41f           guardsman’s fractures 39
  proportions 216–​19,             nasal 19, 57
       217f, 219f                  nasoethmoidal 53–​4,
  thirds 216, 217f, 219f                53f, 54f                  H
  transplantation 531              orbital 48–​51, 48f,           haemangioma 309
  trauma 18–​19, 26, 26f                49f, 50f                  haemorrhage
facelift 366–​9                    orbital roof 51                 orthognathic surgery 266
facial arthromyalgia 382           pan-​facial 56                  retrobulbar 14–​15
facial bipartition 302, 302f       sensory changes 22              traumatic 10–​11
facial nerve 180                   types 32                       hairy leukoplakia
  trauma 27–​8, 28f                zygoma 19, 44–​7, 44f,             482–​3, 482f
facial palsy 444–​5                     45f, 46f                  hand, foot, and mouth
false ankylosis 390             fraenectomy 419                       disease 484
false negative 524              freckle 144                       head injury 4, 12–​13
false positive 524              free flaps 93–​101, 170           health-​related quality of
familial fibrous                Frey’s syndrome 197, 200f             life 132–​4
     dysplasia 437              frontal bone fractures 52–​4,     hearing, cleft lip and
fatigue 109                          53f, 54f                         palate 312
feedback 530                    frontal sinus fractures 52        Heerfordt syndrome 495
fibreoptic endoscopic           fronto-​orbital advance-          hemifacial
     evaluation of                   ment and cranial                 microsomia 310–​11
     swallowing 128                  remodelling 300              herpangina 484
fibrous dysplasia of            Fujita classification             herpes labialis 479
     bone 437                        285, 286t                    herpes simplex 478–​9
fibroxanthoma,                  full-​thickness skin grafts 29,   herpes varicella zoster
     atypical 166–​7                 91, 168, 168f, 169               virus 480–​1
536



      536       INDEX


            herpetiform ulcer 457
            HIV 192, 486–​7
                                             J                                 cutaneous T-​cell 167
                                                                               neck 442
            hives 144                        joint replacement, TMJ          lymphomatous papillary
            horseshoe osteotomy                  388–​9, 389f                    cystadenoma 196
               245, 245f                     junctional naevus 144
            Horton’s syndrome 506
            hospices 140                     K                               M
            human papilloma virus 66                                         macule 144
            Hutchinson’s melanotic           Kaposi’s sarcoma 487            magnetic resonance
               freckle 148–​9, 148f          Karapandzic flaps 92                imaging (MRI)
            Hutchinson’s triad 493           keratoacanthoma 158, 158f        oral cancer 73
            hyperparathyroidism 437          keratocysts 431                  temporomandibular joint
            hyperplastic candidosis 500      Koebner phenomenon 144                385f, 385
            hypertelorism 302–​3             Kohle procedure 262–​3           trauma 25
            hypertrophic scars 30, 109       Kufner osteotomy 250            malar fat pad 367
            hypotensive                                                      malar flattening 19
               anaesthesia 406               L                               malodorous tumours 139
                                                                             malodorous wounds 529
                                             laryngeal mask airway 405       MALToma 191, 192
            I                                laser resurfacing               mandible
            idiopathic condylar                   357–​8, 358t                distraction 277–​8,
                 resorption 395, 395–​6f     lateral canthopexy 362                278f, 279f
            imiquimod 154                    lateral ligament 378             fractures 21, 22,
            immunotherapy 117                Le Fort I fracture 40, 40f            33–​9, 35f
            impacted teeth                   Le Fort I osteotomy 242–​6,      osteotomies 254–​63,
              canines 419                         243–​4f, 245f                    267, 273
              surgical exposure 420             stepped 246, 248f             reconstruction 102f, 102
              wisdom teeth 414–​18              winged 250, 252f             mastication, muscles 378
            impetigo 144                     Le Fort II fracture 40, 41f     maxilla
            implants                         Le Fort II osteotomy             distraction 278, 279f
              aesthetic surgery 369–​70           248–​50, 251f               fractures 22, 47
              dental                         Le Fort III fracture 40, 41f     osteotomies 242–​51,
                   osseointegrated 448–​51   Le Fort III osteotomy                 267, 272–​3
              following oral cancer               251, 300                    reconstruction 102
                   surgery 103               lentiginous lesions 144         maxillary sinus 446–​7
            infection                        lentigo maligna 148–​9,          tumours 110–​11
              non-​odontogenic 428                148f                       meal-​time syndrome 183
              odontogenic 422–​6             lentigo maligna melanoma        median rhomboid
              peri-​operative 399–​400            160, 161f                      glossitis 501
            infectious                       leucoplakia 472–​4,             melanocytic intra-​epidermal
                 mononucleosis 482                472–​3f, 500                   neoplasia 144, 149
            infective endocarditis 408–​9    lichenification 144             melanocytic lesion 144
            inflammatory                     lichenoid reactions 463         melanoma, cutaneous 160–​5,
                 arthropathies 394           lichen planus 462–​3, 462–​3f       161f, 164f
            informed consent 398             liposuction 369                 meniscectomy 387
            infratemporal fossa 525          lips                            meniscopexy 387
            Integra® dermal regener-            cheiloplasty 372–​3, 373f    Merkel cell carcinoma
                 ation template 172             reconstruction 102               166, 166f
            intensity-​modulated radio-         trauma 26–​8, 26f            Michelet–​Champy
                 therapy 112, 113f              see also cleft lip and           principles 34–​6
            internal oblique muscle flap            palate                   microdermabrasion 357
                 99, 100                     local anaesthesia 402–​3        mid-​face fractures
            intradermal naevus 144           local flaps 92, 169–​70,            40–​2, 41f
            in-​transit metastasis 144            170–​1f, 172f              migraine 505
            inverted-​L osteotomy            lower labial segmental          migrainous neuralgia 506
                 259, 260f                        osteotomy 261–​2           Millard lip repair 323,
            Ionizing Radiation (Medical      lymphadenitis 428, 440              324f, 325f
                 Exposure) Regulations       lymphadenopathy                 MIN 144, 149
                 (2017) 527, 527t                 440, 441–​2                miniplates 32
            jaw                              lymphatic                       modified Müller’s
              medicine-​related                   malformations 308–​9           technique 285
                   osteonecrosis 410–​11     lymphoedema 109                 Mohs micrographic surgery
              radiographs 438                lymphoma                            154f, 154
                                                                             INDEX          537

monoblock advancement        noma 488                       intraoperative tissue
   301–​2, 301f              non-​odontogenic cysts 432          marking 84
morphea 144                  non-​odontogenic               investigations 70–​6
mouth                           infection 428               laser vaporization 83
 care during                 non-​odontogenic               multidisciplinary
     radiotherapy 115           tumours 435                      team 78–​9
 dryness 188                 non-​vitamin K an-             neck dissection 85–​7, 108
 floor of mouth                 tagonist oral               nutritional support
     reconstruction 102         anticoagulants 409–​10           120–​3, 129
 open lock 384               nose                           pain management 137–​8
 trauma 20–​1, 20f            fractures 19, 57              palliative care 136–​40
 trismus 381                  post-​orthognathic surgery    photodynamic therapy 85
mucocoele 208, 208f                270, 270f                predicting
mucocutaneous                 repair in cleft lip                complications 109
   candidosis 501                  and palate 323,          premalignant conditions
mucosal grafts 91                  325, 340–​1                   67, 67f
Muenke syndrome 291           rhinoplasty 370–​2            prevention 118
muscles of mastication 378    trauma 21                     psychosocial
mycobacterial                nuclear medicine 74                 outcomes 130
   lymphadenitis 428         nutrition                      radiotherapy 112–​15
myofascial pain 382           oral cancer 120–​3, 129       reconstruction
                              radiotherapy 115                   techniques 90–​103
                                                            recurrence 108
N                                                           resection of primary site
naevus 144                   O                                   82–​5, 83f, 84f
nasal cavity tumours 111     obstructive sleep apnoea       risk stratification
nasal fractures 19, 57          282–​7, 282t, 285t, 286t         models 80
nasal trauma 21              occipitomental radiograph      sentinel node biopsy 87
nasoethmoidal fractures         24, 70                      speech and language
   53–​4, 53f, 54f           occlusion, trauma 20, 20f           therapy 124–​5
nasogastric tubes            ocular trauma 4, 14–​15, 22    staging 76
   121, 122–​3               oculoauriculovertebral         surgical
nasolabial flap 92              syndrome 310                     complications 104–​9
neck                         odontogenic cysts 430–​2       surgical options 82–​8
 dissection 85–​7, 108       odontogenic                    swallowing 126–​9
 lumps 440–​3                   infections 422–​6           symptoms and signs 68, 69f
 traumatic bleeding 10–​11   odontogenic myxoma 435         terminal care 140
 zones 10                    odontogenic                    therapeutic options 80
necrotizing fasciitis 423       tumours 434–​5              tracheostomy 87–​8, 106
needle                       odontomas 434                  treatment principles 78–​9
   cricothyroidotomy 6–​8    open bite 20                  oral hygiene 115
nerve grafts 92              open lock 384                 oral trauma 20–​1, 20f
nerve injuries               oral and oropharyngeal        oral ulceration 456–​8
 oral cancer surgery 107        cancer 61–​141             orbital apex syndrome 51
 orthognathic surgery 267     ablation of tumour 82–​5     orbital fractures 48–​51, 48f,
 traumatic 22                 aetiology 66                    49f, 50f
 wisdom tooth removal         airway obstruction           orbital roof fractures 51
      415, 417                     106, 139                orbital trauma 4, 20
neurofibroma 435              anatomy 64, 64–​5f           oro-​antral fistula 447
NICE guidelines               aspiration 127, 128–​9       orofacial granulomatosis
 acupuncture for              chemotherapy 116–​17            496–​7, 496f
      migraine 505            coblation 83                 oronasal fistula 337–​8
 botulinum toxin for          combined treatment 109       oropharyngeal cancer see
      migraine 505            diagnosis 68                    oral and oropharyngeal
 skin cancer 150, 163         dysphagia 127, 129, 139         cancer
 thromboembolic disease       epidemiology 66              oropharynx 64, 64–​5f
      prevention 398          gene therapy 117             orthodontics
 ventilation tube             health-​related quality of    cleft lip and palate 348–​9
      insertion 346                life 132–​4              peri-​orthognathic
 wisdom tooth                 immunotherapy 117                  surgery 234–​8
      removal 417–​18         intraoperative frozen        orthodontic
nodule 144                         sections 83                surgery 419–​20
538



      538    INDEX


            orthognathic                   orthopantomogram 24,                    stenosis 194, 194f
               surgery 211–​20                 70, 71f                             trauma 27
             adjunctive procedures         orthoptic examination 25              parotid gland
                 280–​1, 280f, 281f        osseointegration 448                    anatomy 180
             aetiology of                  ossifying fibroma 435                   benign tumours
                 deformity 212             osteitis deformans 437                      196–​200, 196f
             CAD/​CAM technology           osteomyelitis 423–​4                    calculi 205
                 232, 280                  osteoradionecrosis 411–​13              clinical examination 184
             cephalometrics 222–​5,        osteosynthesis 32                       deep lobe tumour
                 223f, 225–​6t,            osteotomy                                   199–​200
                 226f, 227t                 bilateral sagittal split 215–​16f,     diffuse swelling 192–​4
             cleft lip and palate 342–​3          254–​7, 255f, 273              pectoralis major
             clinical                       body 261, 262f                           myocutaneous flap 93
                 examination 215–​16        box 302–​3                           PEG 121–​2
             complications 266–​8           horseshoe 245, 245f                  pemphigoid 468–​9
             condylar                       inverted-​L 259, 260f                pemphigus 466–​7, 467f
                 positioning 267–​8         Kufner 250                           percutaneous endoscopic
             diagnosis 214–​20              Le Fort I 242–​6,                        gastrostomy 121–​2
             distraction osteogen-                243–​4f, 245f                  pericoronitis 424
                 esis 276–​81, 277f,        Le Fort II 248–​50, 251f             periodontal abscess 424
                 278f, 279f, 280f,          Le Fort III 251, 300                 persistent idiopathic facial
                 281f, 342–​3               lower labial                             pain 510
             facial proportions 216–​19,          segmental 261–​2               Pfeiffer syndrome 294
                 217f, 219f                 pyramidal                            pharyngeal pouch 443
             general examination 216              naso-​orbital 250              pharynx reconstruction 102
             genioplasty 264–​5,            segmental mandibular                 photodynamic therapy
                 265f, 268                        261–​3, 262f, 263f               basal cell carcinoma 154
             haemorrhage 266                segmental maxillary                    oral cancer 85
             history-​taking 215                  246–​8, 249f                   piezoelectric surgery 528
             intraoperative                 stepped Le Fort I                    Pindborg tumour 435
                 management 240                   246, 248f                      pinna trauma 21
             local examination 216–​18      subspinal 245–​6                     pitch 220t
             mandibular procedures          total subapical                      plain radiographs
                 254–​63, 267, 273                260–​1, 261f                     jaw lesions 438
             maxillary procedures           unfavourable 266                       oral cancer 70–​1, 71f
                 242–​51, 267, 272–​3       vertical subsigmoid                    pre-​orthognathic
             nasal changes 270, 270f              257–​9, 258f                         surgery 222–​4
             nerve damage 267               winged Le Fort I                       trauma 5, 24–​5
             orthodontics 234–​8                  250, 252f                      plaque 144
             patient concerns 214          otitis media with                     platysma 367, 368
             patient evaluation 214            effusion 346                      pleomorphic dermal
             perioperative                 otoplasty 364–​6                          sarcoma 166–​7
                 management 240                                                  pleomorphic salivary
             photographic records                                                    adenoma 196
                 222, 223f                 P                                     pneumoparotitis 194
             postoperative care 241        Paget’s disease 437                   polysomnography 284–​5
             preoperative                  pain management                       positional skull deformity
                 assessment 240             oral cancer 137–​8                       298–​9, 299f
             radiographs 222–​4             wounds 529                           positive predictive
             record keeping 222–​5         palatal advancement                       value 524
             sleep apnoea 282–​7,              flap 447                          positron emission tomog-
                 282t, 285t, 286t          palate see cleft lip and                  raphy (PET) 74
             soft tissue changes 270           palate                            potentially malignant oral
             stability 272–​4              palliative care 136–​40                   lesions 473
             study models 222              pan-​facial fractures 56              potions 522
             timing of surgery 240         papule 144                            prasugrel 410
             tooth damage 268              paramedian forehead                   primary
             treatment objectives 213          flap 93                               gingivostomatitis 478
             treatment                     paranasal sinuses 446–​7              proliferative verrucous
                 planning 228–​32          parenteral feeding 122                    leukoplakia 474
             unfavourable                  parotid duct                          prosthetic
                 osteotomy 266              anatomy 180                              rehabilitation 103
                                                                               INDEX          539

pseudomembranous               salivary glands 177–​208     skin
   candidosis 500                anatomy 180–​1               keratoacanthoma 158, 158f
psychosocial factors             benign tumours               premalignant
 cleft lip and palate 350             196–​200, 202                 lesions 148–​9
 oral cancer 130                 calculi 204–​5, 204f         terminology 144
pupils 14                        clinical examination 184     types 145
pustule 144                      diffuse swelling 192–​4      ultraviolet radiation 146
pyramidal naso-​orbital          history of lumps 183       skin cancer
   osteotomy 250                 investigations 186           basal cell carcinoma
                                 localized swelling                 152–​5, 152f
                                      196–​202                complications 174, 174–​5f
Q                                malignant tumours            cutaneous melanoma
quality of life 132                   200–​2, 201f                  160–​5, 161f, 164f
                                 meal-​time syndrome 183      Merkel cell carcinoma
                                 mucocoele 208, 208f                166, 166f
R                                physiology 182               post-​excision reconstruc-
raccoon eyes 19                  ranula 206                         tion 168–​72, 168f,
radial forearm flap 94–​6,       tumours of minor glands            170–​1f, 172f
    94f, 96f                          208, 209–​10f           squamous cell carcinoma
radicular dental cysts 430     sarcoidosis 192, 494–​5              156–​8, 158–​9f
radiologically inserted        sarcoma, pleomorphic           T-​cell lymphoma 167
    gastrostomy 122                dermal 166–​7              types of 150
radiotherapy                   satellite metastasis 144     skin grafts 29, 91–​2, 168–​9,
  basal cell carcinoma 155     scars, hypertrophic              168f, 170
  oral cancer 112–​15              30, 109                  sleep
  salivary gland               scintigraphy                   apnoea 282–​7, 282t,
       tumours 202               bone 74                            285t, 286t
  swallowing problems 127        salivary gland 186           cycle 283t
Ramsay Hunt                    secondary synostosis 291       endoscopy 285
    syndrome 481               sedation 403                   testing 284–​5
ranula 206                     segmental mandibular         smoking 66
rapid palatal expansion            osteotomy 261–​3,        snap test 361
    246, 247f                      262f, 263f               solar keratosis 148
reconstruction                 segmental maxillary oste-    solitary bone cysts 432
  oral cancer 90–​103              otomy 246–​8, 249f       Sommerlad repair 329
  skin cancer 168–​72, 168f,   sensitivity 524              Sowray–​Haskell procedure
       170–​1f, 172f           sensory changes                  263, 263f
regional flaps 93                facial fractures 22        specificity 524
relative afferent pupillary      oral cancer surgery 108    speech and speech therapy
    defect 14                  sentinel node biopsy 87,       cleft lip and palate 343–​5
respiratory depression             156–​7, 163                oral cancer 124–​5
    index 284                  sepsis 424–​6                sphenomandibular
resurfacing                    septal deviation 21              ligament 378
    techniques 357–​9          septal haematoma 21          Spitz naevus 144
retrobulbar                    septal reduction 270         split-​thickness grafts 29, 91,
    haemorrhage 14–​15         septic arthritis 394             168, 168f, 169
retrograde root                seroma 106                   squamous cell carcinoma
    filling 418–​19            shingles 480–​1                cutaneous 156–​8, 158–​9f
revalidation of                shoulder problems,             oral 473
    consultants 530                post-​oral cancer        Stafne bone cysts 431
rhinoplasty 370–​2                 surgery 108–​9           staging
rhytidectomy 366–​9            sialadenoscopy 186             cutaneous malignant
Ricketts line 219f             sialocoele 197                       melanoma 162
roll 220t                      sialography 71                 cutaneous squamous cell
rosacea 144                    sialolithiasis 204–​5                carcinoma 156
                               SIGN guidelines, skin          oral cancer 76
                                   cancer 150               staphylococcal
S                              simple synostosis 291            lymphadenitis 428
Saethre–​Chotzen               single-​suture synostoses    statistics 524
    syndrome 294                   291, 292–​3, 292t        Steiner’s line 219f
salivary fistula 197           Sjögren’s syndrome           stepped Le Fort I oste-
salivary flow 182                  190–​1, 193                  otomy 246, 248f
540



      540    INDEX


            steroid cover 408                 displacement into maxil-     ticagrelor 410
            Stevens–​Johnson                       lary sinus 447          tissue expansion 171
                syndrome 471                  exposure of impacted/​       titanium implants 370
            stylomandibular ligament 378           unerupted 420           titanium miniplates 32
            sublingual dermoid cyst 442       impacted canines 419         TNM staging
            sublingual gland                  odontogenic                     cutaneous malignant
              anatomy 181                          infections 422–​6               melanoma 162
              clinical examination 184        retrograde root                 oral cancer 76
            sublingual haematoma 20                filling 418–​19         tongue
            submandibular duct 181            trauma 58                         reconstruction 102
            submandibular gland               wisdom tooth                 tooth see teeth
              anatomy 180–​1                       removal 414–​18         topical anaesthetics 402
              calculi 204–​5, 204f          telecanthus 53                 torticollis 298
              clinical examination          temporal arteritis             total subapical osteotomy
                  184, 185f                     508–​9, 508f                    260–​1, 261f
              excision 205                  temporalis flap 93             toxic epidermal
            submucous fibrosis 476          temporomandibular                   necrolysis 471
            subspinal osteotomy 229             joint 377–​95              tracheostomy
            sun protection factor 146         acquired disorders              elective 406–​7
            sunscreens 146                         380, 380f                  oral cancer 87–​8, 106
            superficial musculo-​             anatomy 378–​9               transpalatal
                aponeurotic system            ankylosis 390–​1,                 distractor 246
                367, 368                           390f, 391f              trauma
            superficial parotidectomy         arthrocentesis and              advanced trauma life
                197, 198–​9f                       manipulation 386                support 4
            superior orbital fissure          arthroscopy 386                 aetiology 2
                syndrome 51                   closed lock 384                 airway management
            surgical airway 6–​8, 7f, 406     condylar shave 387                   6–​8, 7f
            surgical                          developmental                   antibiotic prophylaxis 16
                cricothyroidotomy 8, 9f            disorders 380              bleeding 10–​11
            surgical principles               dislocation 392–​3, 393f        deformity following 59
              anaesthesia 402–​7              dysfunction 384–​7              dental injuries 58
              anticoagulants/​                eminectomy 387                  energy transfer 3
                  antiplatelets 409–​10       idiopathic condylar re-         hard tissue
              infection prevention                 sorption 395, 395–​6f           management 32–​9
                  399–​400                    inflammatory                    head injury 4, 12–​13
              infective endocarditis               arthropathies 394          imaging 5, 24–​5
                  prophylaxis 408–​9          internal                        initial assessment 3
              informed consent 398                 derangement 384            inspection 18–​21
              medicine-​related osteo-        meniscectomy 387                intravenous access 8
                  necrosis of the             meniscopexy 387                 investigations 24–​5
                  jaw 410–​11                 myofascial pain 382             moving patients 8
              osteoradionecrosis 411–​13      neoplasia 394                   ocular 4, 14–​15, 22
              postoperative bleeding 410      open lock 384                   orbital 4, 20
              steroid cover 408               replacement                     priority setting 5
              thromboembolic                       388–​9, 389f               soft tissue
                  prophylaxis 398–​9          septic arthritis 394                 management 26–​30
              wound care 529                  trismus 381                     spinal immobilization 8
            swallowing 126–​9               temporomandibular                 tetanus prophylaxis
            swinging light test 14              ligament 378                       16–​17, 16t
            syndromic synostoses            temporoparietal fascia            see also fractures
                291, 294–​6                     flap 93                    traumatic bone cysts 432
            synovial chondromatosis 394     Tennison lip repair 324f,      Treacher Collins
            syphilis 492–​3, 492f               324, 325f                       syndrome 312
                                            Tessier classification         trigeminal nerve injury 22
                                                304, 304f                  trigeminal neuralgia 502–​3
            T                               tetanus prophylaxis            trismus 381
            T-​cell lymphoma 167                16–​17, 16t                true negative 524
            teeth                           third molar surgery 414–​18    true positive 524
              apicectomy 418–​19            thromboembolic                 tuberculosis 192, 490–​1
              damage in orthognathic            prophylaxis 398–​9         tumescent solution 522
                   surgery 268              thyroglossal duct cyst 442     turkey wattle sign 308
                                                                              INDEX        541


U                              velopharyngeal incompe-
                                   tence 336–​7, 344–​5
                                                             winged Le Fort I osteotomy
                                                                250, 252f
ultrasound                     venous malformations 308      wisdom tooth
  cleft lip and palate 318     vertical subsigmoid oste-        removal 414–​18
  oral cancer 74–​5                otomy 257–​9, 258f        wound
  salivary glands 186, 187f    videofluoroscopy 128           care 529
  trauma 25                    vision                         healing stages 29
ultraviolet radiation 146        post-​blepharoplasty 363     post-​oral cancer
University of Washington         trauma 4, 14                     surgery 107
    Quality of Life            V–​Y closure 270, 271f         traumatic 18, 29
    (UW-​QOL) 132–​3
upper labial
    fraenectomy 419            W                             X
urticaria 144                  warfarin 409                  xerostomia 188
                               Warthin’s tumour 196
V                              Water’s view
                                  (occipitomental radio-     Y
vascular                          graph) 24, 70              yaw 220t
    malformations 308–​9       wheal 144
vascular tumours 309           white eye blow-​out 48
Veau–​Wardill–​Kilner push-​   Whitehead’s varnish 522       Z
    back techniques 329        WHO analgesic ladder 137–​8   zygoma fractures 19, 44–​7,
vein grafts 92                 wind instrument players 194      44f, 45f, 46f
542
54
546
548
50
52
