


Structure
The structure of surgical care refers to measurable attributes
of a hospital (e.g., size and volume) or its providers (e.g., spe-
cialty training and years in practice) (Table 1.1). Measures of
structure are extensively used in the measurement of surgical
quality, owing to their widespread availability. The American
College of Surgeons (ACS) and the American Society of
Metabolic and Bariatric Surgeons (ASMBS) accredit hospi-
tals for bariatric surgery based largely on measures of struc-
ture, including hospital volume, surgeon volume, and other
structural elements necessary for providing multidisciplinary
care for the morbidly obese [4].
   Structural elements have several key strengths as quality
measures. First, they are relatively easy to ascertain. Often,
structural elements such as volume can be obtained from
readily available administrative data. Second, many structural
measures are strong predictors of hospital and surgeon out-
comes. The most well-known example of this relationship was
described by Birkmeyer et al., who observed a fivefold differ-
ence in mortality between low- and high-volume hospitals for
high-risk surgical procedures [7]. This same relationship holds
true for individual surgeon volume as well [8]. Since the early
2000s, the volume-outcome relationship has been demon-
strated for dozens of operations [9].
                  Chapter 1. Defining Quality in Surgery            5

Table 1.1 Approaches to measuring the quality of care for aortic
surgery with advantages and disadvantages of each approach
Type of
measure       Example             Advantages       Disadvantages
Structure     Hospital or         Inexpensive      Not actionable
              surgeon volume      and readily      for quality
                                  available        improvement
                                  Good proxy       Not good for
                                  for outcomes     discriminating
                                                   among
                                                   individual
                                                   providers
Process      Prophylactic         Actionable       Known
             antibiotics given    as targets for   processes
             on time              improvement      relate to
             Adherence            Less             unimportant
             to venous            influenced by    or rare
             thromboembolism      patient risk     surgical
             prevention           and random       outcomes
             guidelines           errors           Very few “high
                                                   leverage”
                                                   processes
                                                   of care are
                                                   known
Outcomes     Anastomotic          Seen as the      Sample
             leak rates with      bottom line      sizes often
             bariatric surgery    of patient       too small at
             Wound infection      care             individual
             with ventral         Enjoy good       hospitals
             hernia repair        “buy-in”         Need for
                                  from             detailed
                                  surgeons         data for risk
                                                   adjustment
Composite    Leapfrog group’s     Addresses        Not granular
             “Survival            problems         enough to
             Predictor”           with small       identify
                                  sample size      specific
                                  Makes sense      clinical areas
                                  of multiple      that need
                                  conflicting      improvement
                                  measures
6     R. Howard and J. B. Dimick

    However, there are certain limitations of using structural
quality measures. Most importantly, they are proxies for qual-
ity rather than direct measures. As a result, they only hold
true on average. For example, while high-volume surgeons
are better than low-volume surgeons on average, there are
likely to be some high-volume surgeons with bad outcomes
and low-volume surgeons with good outcomes [5]. What’s
more, structural measures are not meaningfully actionable
for quality improvement. Hospitals cannot easily change
their operative volume, although regionalization of high-risk
care may offer a solution to centralize care at more special-
ized centers and leverage the volume-outcome relationship.
    In recent years, structural measures of care have also been
found to be lacking when implemented as real-world quality
metrics. For example, after certain high-risk cancer operations,
there was no mortality difference in hospitals that met the
Leapfrog group’s minimum volume standards and those that
did not [10]. Similarly, even among hospitals designated as bar-
iatric centers of excellence based on volume standards, there is
still a 17-fold difference in rates of serious complications [11].


Process
Processes of care are the steps and details of a patient’s care
that can lead to good (or bad) outcomes. Although processes
of care can represent details of care in the preoperative, intra-
operative, and postoperative phases, the most familiar pro-
cess measures focus on details in the immediate preoperative
phase of patient care. For example, the Center for Medicare
and Medicaid Services (CMS) Surgical Care Improvement
Project (SCIP) measures utilization of preoperative antibi-
otic and venous thromboembolism prophylaxes. Along these
lines, one of the most familiar approaches to improving the
process of care in surgery is the use of a presurgical checklist,
which verifies that a number of best practices (confirming
patient name, procedure laterality, administration of antibiot-
ics, etc.) have been performed [12]. This has now become
standard practice in the United States.
                   Chapter 1. Defining Quality in Surgery         7

    Process measures have several strengths as quality mea-
sures (Table 1.1). First, processes of care are extremely action-
able in quality improvement. When hospitals and surgeon are
“low outliers” for process compliance (e.g., patients not get-
ting timely antibiotic prophylaxis), they know exactly where
to target improvement. Second, in contrast to risk-adjusted
outcomes measurement, processes of care do not need to be
adjusted for differences in patient risk, which limits the need
for data collection from the medical chart and saves valuable
time and effort.
    However, using processes of care has several significant
limitations in surgery. First, most existing process measures
are not strongly related to important outcomes. For example,
the SCIP measures, which are by far the most widely used
process measure in surgery, are not related to surgical mortal-
ity, infections, or thromboembolism [13]. Similarly, after
implementing the preoperative checklist in 101 hospitals in
Ontario, Canada, there was no measurable change in postop-
erative complications or mortality [14]. The lack of a relation-
ship between process improvement and surgical mortality can
be explained by the fact that the complications they aim to
prevent are secondary (e.g., superficial wound infection) or
extremely rare (e.g., pulmonary embolism). However, there is
also a very weak relationship between process measures and
the outcome they are supposed to prevent (e.g., timely admin-
istration of prophylactic antibiotics and wound infection) [15].
This finding is more difficult to explain. It is possible that there
are simply multiple other processes (many unmeasured or
unmeasurable) that contribute to good surgical outcomes. As
a result, it is likely that adherence to process best practices is
necessary but not sufficient for good surgical outcomes.


Outcome
Outcomes represent the end results of care. In surgery, the
most commonly evaluated outcomes are mortality, serious
complications, and hospital readmissions. For example, the
8     R. Howard and J. B. Dimick

NSQIP, the largest clinical registry focusing on surgery,
reports risk-adjusted morbidity and mortality rates to partici-
pating hospitals [3]. While morbidity and mortality have long
been the “gold standard” in surgery, patient-­reported out-
comes such as functional status and quality of life are also
critically important.
   Direct outcome measures have several strengths
(Table 1.1). First, everyone agrees that outcomes are impor-
tant. Measuring the end results of care makes intuitive sense
to surgeons and other stakeholders. For example, the NSQIP
has been enthusiastically championed by surgeons and other
clinical leaders [16]. Second, outcomes feedback alone may
improve quality. This so-called Hawthorne effect is seen
whenever outcomes are measured and reported back to pro-
viders. For example, the NSQIP in the Veterans Affairs (VA)
hospitals and private sector has documented improvements
over time that cannot be attributed to any specific efforts to
improve outcomes [17].
   However, outcome measures have key limitations. First,
when the event rate is low (numerator) or the number of
cases is small (denominator), outcomes cannot be reliably
measured. Small sample size and low event rates conspire to
limit the statistical power of hospital outcomes comparisons.
For most operations, surgical mortality is too rare to be used
as a reliable quality measure [18]. For example, a study exam-
ining seven operations for which mortality was advocated as
a quality measure by the Agency for Healthcare Research
and Quality (AHRQ) found that only one of the seven
operations – coronary artery bypass surgery – had high
enough caseloads to reliably measure quality with surgical
mortality [19].
   Accurately measuring and comparing outcomes as a qual-
ity improvement instrument is also confounded by many fac-
tors. Surgical outcomes are influenced not only by quality of
care but also by random variation, sample size, and case mix.
Whereas structure and process measure are fixed elements of
care, outcomes require additional risk and reliability adjust-
                 Chapter 1. Defining Quality in Surgery      9

ment to account for these confounders [20]. Acquiring the
data necessary to make these adjustments is labor-intensive
and expensive. For example, the NSQIP collects more than 80
patient variables from the medical chart for this purpose [17].
Each NSQIP hospital employs a trained nurse clinician to
collect this data.


Composite
Composite measures are created by combining one or more
structure, process, and outcome measures [21]. Composite
measures offer several advantages over the individual mea-
sures discussed above (Table 1.1). By combining multiple
measures, it is possible to overcome problems with small
sample size discussed above. Composite measures also pro-
vide a “global” measure of quality. This type of measure has
been used for quality for value-based purchasing or other
efforts that require an overall or summary measure of
quality.
    One key limitation with composite measures is that there
is no “gold standard” approach for weighting input measures.
Perhaps the most common approach is to weight each input
measure equally. For example, in the ongoing Premier/CMS
pay for performance initiative, individual measures are
weighted. However, this approach is also flawed insofar as
variation in these composite measures is entirely driven by
the process measures [22].
    Another limitation with composite measures is that they
are not always actionable for quality improvement. By com-
bining information on multiple measures and/or clinical con-
ditions, there is often not enough “granularity” for clinicians
to use the information for quality improvement. To target
quality improvement efforts, it is often necessary to decon-
struct the composite into its component measures and find
out where the problem lies (e.g., the specific procedure or
complication).
10    R. Howard and J. B. Dimick

Patient-Reported Outcomes
An important element of surgical quality not captured in the
traditional Donabedian paradigm outlined above is patient-­
reported outcomes. There is now wide recognition of the
importance of patient-reported outcomes. These outcomes
capture the patient’s perspective on their postoperative expe-
rience, and common measures include functional status, satis-
faction, and quality of life.
   CMS now uses the Hospital Consumer Assessment of
Healthcare Providers and Systems (HCAHPS) survey as part
of its value-based purchasing program. Although it is still
unclear how these outcomes can be meaningfully integrated
into actionable quality improvement efforts, they are never-
theless a necessary complement to traditional outcome mea-
sures [23]. It has been demonstrated that there is a high
association between patient satisfaction and traditional
objective outcome measures [24]. This suggests that efforts
and policies to improve the patient experience can be under-
taken without negatively impacting other important outcome
measures.


Choosing the Right Measurement Approach
No approach to quality measurement is perfect. Each type of
measure – structure, process, and outcome – has its own
strengths and limitations. In general, selecting the right
approach to measure quality depends on characteristics of
the procedure and the specific policy application [5].
    Certain characteristics of the surgical procedure should be
considered when selecting a quality measure (Fig. 1.1).
Specifically, one should consider how risky the procedure is
(i.e., how often to complications occur?) and what the volume
of the procedure is (i.e., how often is it performed?). For pro-
cedures that are both common and relatively high risk (e.g.,
colectomy and gastric bypass), outcomes are reliable enough
to be used as measures of quality (Fig. 1.1, Quadrant I). For
                    Chapter 1. Defining Quality in Surgery         11

                               High risk
   Quadrant IV: Structure                      Quadrant I: Outcomes

 Gastric cancer resection
                                  Colon resection
         Whipple procedure

                                     Bariatic surgery


Low caseloads                                  High caseloads



    Spigelian hernia
                                               Inguinal hernia

   Quadrant III: Focus                         Quadrant II: Process,
   elsewhere                   Low risk        functional outcomes

Figure 1.1 Choosing among measures of structure, process, and
outcomes. For high-risk, high caseload operations (e.g., colectomy
and bariatric procedures), outcomes are useful quality measures. For
low-risk, common procedures (e.g., inguinal hernia repair), pro-
cesses of care or functional outcomes are appropriate measures. For
high-risk, uncommon operations (e.g., gastric and pancreatic cancer
resection), measures of structure, such as hospital volume, are most
appropriate. For low-risk, low caseload operations (e.g., spigelian
hernia repair), it would be best to focus measurement efforts else-
where. (Figure modified by Birkmeyer et al. [5])

procedures that are common but low risk (e.g., inguinal her-
nia repair), measures of the process of care or patient-­
reported outcomes are the best approach (Fig. 1.1, Quadrant
II). For procedures that are high risk but uncommon (e.g.,
pancreatic and esophageal resection), structural measures
such as hospital volume are likely the best approach (Fig. 1.1,
Quadrant IV). In fact, empirical data suggests that structural
measures such as hospital volume are better predictors of
future performance than direct outcome measures for these
uncommon, high-risk operations [25]. Finally, for operations
that are both uncommon and low risk (e.g., Spigelian hernia
12    R. Howard and J. B. Dimick

repair), it is probably best to focus quality measurement
efforts on other, more high leverage procedures.
    When choosing an approach to quality measurement, the
specific policy application should also be considered. In par-
ticular, it is important to distinguish between policy efforts
aimed at selective referral and quality improvement. For
selective referral, the main goal is to redirect patients to the
highest quality providers. Structural measures, such as hospi-
tal volume, are particularly good for this purpose. Hospital
volume tends to be strongly related to outcomes, and large
gains in outcomes could be achieved by concentrating
patients in high-volume hospitals. In contrast, structural mea-
sures are not directly actionable and, therefore, do not make
good measures for quality improvement. For improving qual-
ity, process and outcome measures are better because they
provide actionable targets. Surgeons and hospitals can
improve by addressing problems with process compliance or
focus on clinical areas with high rates of adverse outcomes.
For example, the NSQIP reports risk-adjusted morbidity and
mortality rates to every hospital. Surgeon champions and
quality improvement personnel will target improvement
efforts to areas where performance is statistically worse than
expected.


Improving Quality Measurement
Although the science of surgical quality measurement has
come a long way in the past two decades, the methodology is
still developing. Here we outline important improvements to
quality measurement that address the problems with the pro-
cess of care and outcome measures discussed above.
    A central element of meaningful outcomes reporting and
comparison is the use of appropriate risk-adjustment tech-
niques [26]. This process helps account for variation in case
mix across hospitals, since a hospital that has a higher propor-
tion of comorbid, complex patients would be reasonably
expected to have a higher raw number of complications than
                  Chapter 1. Defining Quality in Surgery       13

a hospital that has younger, less sick patients. The importance
of risk adjustment is powerfully illustrated by a study com-
paring outcomes after emergency colectomy between rural
and urban hospitals [27]. Before adjusting for factors such as
patient age, gender, race, and comorbidity profile, rural hospi-
tals had a much lower unadjusted 30-day mortality at 10.9%
versus 16.3%. However, after adjusting for this difference in
patient factors, the difference narrows substantially to 14.3%
versus 16.2%, reflecting the fact that rural hospitals tend to
have less complex patients.
    At present, most clinical registries collect a large number
of clinical data elements from the medical record for risk
adjustment. This “kitchen sink” approach to risk adjustment
is largely based on the assumption that each additional vari-
able improves our ability to make fair hospital comparisons.
However, empiric data suggests that only the most important
variables contribute meaningfully to risk-adjustment models.
For example, Tu and colleagues demonstrated that a 5-­variable
model provides nearly identical results to a 12-variable model
for comparing hospital outcomes with cardiac surgery [28].
Using data from the NSQIP, we have demonstrated similar
results for both general surgical procedures [26]. These results
should be used to streamline the collection of data for risk
adjustment, which will decrease the costs of data collection
and lower the bar for participation in these important clinical
registries.
    Advanced statistical techniques are also needed to address
the problem of “noisy” outcome measures [29]. As discussed
above, imprecision from small sample size is the Achilles heel
of outcomes measurement. Analytic techniques that rely on
empirical Bayes theory to adjust hospital outcomes for reli-
ability help mitigate this problem. In this approach, the statis-
tical “noise” is explicitly measured and removed by shrinking
the observed outcome rate back toward the average rate. For
example, Fig. 1.2 shows risk-adjusted hospital morbidity rates
across quintiles for ventral hernia repair, before and after
adjusting for reliability. Before adjusting for reliability, rates
of morbidity varied eightfold (2.3–17.5%) from the “best” to
14         R. Howard and J. B. Dimick

                20
                                              17.5
                18
                16
                                                                               14.0
                14
Risk adjusted




                                       12.0                             11.3
  Morbidity




                12
                                                                 10.0
                                 9.2                       9.1
     (%)




                10
                                                     8.0
                 8         6.7
                 6
                 4   2.3
                 2
                 0
                     1      2     3    4       5     1      2    3    4         5
                           Not adjusted                    Adjusted for
                           for reliability                  reliability

Figure 1.2 Comparison of ventral hernia repair morbidity rates
across hospital quintiles (1 = “best hospitals” and 5 = “worst hospi-
tals”) before and after adjusting for statistical reliability. After
adjusting for reliability, the apparent variation across hospitals is
greatly diminished

“worst” quintile. However, after removing chance variation
(i.e., “noise”) by adjusting for reliability, rates of morbidity
varied less than twofold (8.0–14.0%) from the “best” to
“worst” quintile.
    While this approach has many advantages, reliability
adjustment makes the assumption that small hospitals have
average performance. Although this approach gives small hos-
pitals, the benefit of the doubt (i.e., they are innocent until
proven guilty), under certain circumstances it could bias hos-
pital rankings. For instance, given the well-known relationship
between volume and outcome in surgery, these small hospitals
may actually have performance below average. Incorporating
information about hospital volume could address this bias. We
have developed a novel technique for performing reliability
adjustment by shrinking to a c­onditional average (i.e., the
outcome expected given hospital volume) to address this
problem [6]. This approach is considered a composite measure
as it includes two inputs (mortality and volume).
                  Chapter 1. Defining Quality in Surgery     15

   This general approach can also be used to create more
sophisticated composite measures of quality. As discussed
above, most current approaches for combining measures are
flawed. To address this problem, we have developed a method
for empirically weighting input measures [30]. Briefly, we first
identify a gold standard quality measure, such as mortality or
serious morbidity. We then determine the relationship
between each candidate measure and this gold standard mea-
sure. Finally, each input measure is given a weight based on
(1) the reliability with which it is measured and (2) how cor-
related it is with the gold standard measure. These empirically
weighted composite measures have been shown to be better
predictors of future performance than individual measures
alone.


 easuring Surgeon, Hospital, and Network
M
Quality
Despite continuing uncertainty about how best to method-
ologically measure performance, value-based payments, sur-
geon report cards, and national rankings are now a reality of
surgical practice. Here we present examples of instruments
currently used to compare quality at the surgeon, hospital,
and network level and offer strategies for how best to incor-
porate the above approaches into these measurements.
   One example of how surgeon quality is currently mea-
sured and presented to patients is via ProPublica’s “Surgeon
Scorecard,” which claims to report risk-adjusted individual
surgeon outcomes. Currently, the scorecard attempts to rate
surgeons for eight common elective procedures. However,
recent studies have shown that this mechanism is underpow-
ered to detect any meaningful difference – to detect a statisti-
cally significant difference in outcomes after laparoscopic
cholecystectomy, surgeons would need to perform at least 170
of these cases. However, no individual surgeon in the
ProPublica scorecard comes close to that volume [31]. An
emerging and likely more meaningful approach to individual
16    R. Howard and J. B. Dimick

surgeon rating is the use of intraoperative video assessment,
where surgeon skill is evaluated by peer reviewers using stan-
dardized instruments. Recent data suggest that surgeon tech-
nical skill assessed via video review is directly related to
complication rates and mortality [32]. Quality improvement
efforts directed at individual surgeon performance are
increasingly utilizing video review [33].
   Measuring quality at the hospital level requires taking into
account the multiple teams, providers, and processes that
affect a patient’s overall surgical episode. Only once we have
an understanding of the root causes that explain outcomes
differences between hospitals can best practices be promoted.
One such example is the notion of “failure to rescue,” which
sheds light on the mechanisms underlying variations in surgi-
cal mortality rates between hospitals. In a study by Ghaferi
et al. using clinically rich data from the NSQIP, hospitals were
ranked according to risk-adjusted mortality [34]. When com-
paring the “best” to “worst” hospitals, they found no signifi-
cant differences in overall (24.6% vs. 26.9%) or major (18.2%
vs. 16.2%) complication rates. However, the so-called failure
to rescue (death following major complications) was almost
twice as high in hospitals with very high mortality as in those
with very low mortality (21.4% vs. 12.5%, p < 0.001). This
study highlights the need to focus on processes of care related
to the timely recognition and management of complications –
aimed at eliminating “failure to rescue” – to reduce variations
in surgical mortality.
   Lastly, measuring the quality of hospitals networks as
opposed to individual hospitals is becoming increasingly
common. Over the last decade, hospitals have been consoli-
dated into large multicenter networks under the premise that
this move would improve the quality of care. Currently, the
US News and World Report ranks hospitals networks as
opposed to individual hospitals to reflect this. Measuring the
quality of these networks largely relies upon traditional struc-
ture measures such as volume. By participating in a hospital
network, small rural hospitals can refer complex surgical
cases to be performed at a high-volume center. We have
                  Chapter 1. Defining Quality in Surgery         17

already discussed that evidence is emerging that such “vol-
ume pledge” measures may fall short [10]. Conversely, net-
works can also be evaluated on how well they decentralize
knowledge and best practices, so that care across the network,
regardless of hospital size, can be standardized according to
accepted guidelines [35]. Future efforts to measure surgical
quality may focus on how well guideline-concordant care is
delivered across a network of hospitals.


Conclusions
Each type of quality measure – structure, process, and out-
come – has its unique strengths and limitations. Structural
measures are strongly related to outcomes but do not dis-
criminate among individual providers. Process ­measures offer
actionable steps for improvement but often have a tenuous
association with outcomes. Outcomes are the bottom line in
surgery, but sampling and adjustment methods are needed to
meaningfully compare them between hospitals and surgeons.
Other measures such as patient-reported outcomes offer
critical information, but their incorporation into quality
improvement efforts is less clear. Ultimately, when choosing
among the various approaches to define surgical quality, sur-
geons need to be flexible and consider the specific policy
application prior to selecting a single measure.


References
1. Osborne NH, Nicholas LH, Ghaferi AA, Upchurch GR Jr,
   Dimick JB. Do popular media and internet-based hospital qual-
   ity ratings identify hospitals with better cardiovascular surgery
   outcomes? J Am Coll Surg. 2010;210(1):87–92.
2. Rosenthal MB, Dudley RA. Pay-for-performance: will the latest
   payment trend improve care? JAMA. 2007;297(7):740–4.
3. Birkmeyer JD, Shahian DM, Dimick JB, et al. Blueprint for a
   new American College of Surgeons: National Surgical Quality
   Improvement Program. J Am Coll Surg. 2008;207(5):777–82.
18     R. Howard and J. B. Dimick

 4. Dimick JB, Osborne NH, Nicholas L, Birkmeyer JD. Identifying
    high-quality bariatric surgery centers: hospital volume or risk-­
    adjusted outcomes? J Am Coll Surg. 2009;209(6):702–6.
 5. Birkmeyer JD, Dimick JB, Birkmeyer NJ. Measuring the quality
    of surgical care: structure, process, or outcomes? J Am Coll Surg.
    2004;198(4):626–32.
 6. Dimick JB, Staiger DO, Baser O, Birkmeyer JD. Composite mea-
    sures for predicting surgical mortality in the hospital. Health Aff
    (Millwood). 2009;28(4):1189–98.
 7. Birkmeyer JD, Siewers AE, Finlayson EV, et al. Hospital vol-
    ume and surgical mortality in the United States. N Engl J Med.
    2002;346(15):1128–37.
 8. Birkmeyer JD, Stukel TA, Siewers AE, Goodney PP, Wennberg
    DE, Lucas FL. Surgeon volume and operative mortality in the
    United States. N Engl J Med. 2003;349(22):2117–27.
 9. Morche J, Mathes T, Pieper D. Relationship between surgeon
    volume and outcomes: a systematic review of systematic reviews.
    Syst Rev. 2016;5(1):204.
10. Sheetz KH, Chhabra KR, Smith ME, Dimick JB, Nathan
    H. Association of discretionary hospital volume standards for
    high-risk cancer surgery with patient outcomes and access,
    2005–2016. JAMA Surg. 2019;154(11):1005–12.
11. Ibrahim AM, Ghaferi AA, Thumma JR, Dimick JB. Variation in
    outcomes at bariatric surgery centers of excellence. JAMA Surg.
    2017;152(7):629–36.
12. Haynes AB, Weiser TG, Berry WR, et al. A surgical safety check-
    list to reduce morbidity and mortality in a global population. N
    Engl J Med. 2009;360(5):491–9.
13. Hawn MT. Surgical care improvement: should performance mea-
    sures have performance measures. JAMA. 2010;303(24):2527–8.
14. Urbach DR, Govindarajan A, Saskin R, Wilton AS, Baxter
    NN. Introduction of surgical safety checklists in Ontario, Canada.
    N Engl J Med. 2014;370(11):1029–38.
15. Stulberg JJ, Delaney CP, Neuhauser DV, Aron DC, Fu P,
    Koroukian SM. Adherence to surgical care improvement proj-
    ect measures and the association with postoperative infections.
    JAMA. 2010;303(24):2479–85.
16. Neuman HB, Michelassi F, Turner JW, Bass BL. Surrounded
    by quality metrics: what do surgeons think of ACS-NSQIP?
    Surgery. 2009;145(1):27–33.
                   Chapter 1. Defining Quality in Surgery          19

17. Khuri SF, Daley J, Henderson WG. The comparative assessment
    and improvement of quality of surgical care in the Department
    of Veterans Affairs. Arch Surg. 2002;137(1):20–7.
18. Dimick JB, Welch HG. The zero mortality paradox in surgery. J
    Am Coll Surg. 2008;206(1):13–6.
19. Dimick JB, Welch HG, Birkmeyer JD. Surgical mortality as an
    indicator of hospital quality: the problem with small sample size.
    JAMA. 2004;292(7):847–51.
20. Dimick JB, Ghaferi AA, Osborne NH, Ko CY, Hall BL. Reliability
    adjustment for reporting hospital outcomes with surgery. Ann
    Surg. 2012;255(4):703–7.
21. Dimick JB, Staiger DO, Hall BL, Ko CY, Birkmeyer
    JD. Composite measures for profiling hospitals on surgical mor-
    bidity. Ann Surg. 2013;257(1):67–72.
22. O’Brien SM, DeLong ER, Dokholyan RS, Edwards FH, Peterson
    ED. Exploring the behavior of hospital composite performance
    measures: an example from coronary artery bypass surgery.
    Circulation. 2007;116(25):2969–75.
23. Bilimoria KY, Cella D, Butt Z. Current challenges in using
    patient-reported outcomes for surgical care and performance
    measurement: everybody wants to hear from the patient, but are
    we ready to listen? JAMA Surg. 2014;149(6):505–6.
24. Sacks GD, Lawson EH, Dawes AJ, et al. Relationship between
    hospital performance on a patient satisfaction survey and surgi-
    cal quality. JAMA Surg. 2015;150(9):858–64.
25. Birkmeyer JD, Dimick JB, Staiger DO. Operative mortality and
    procedure volume as predictors of subsequent hospital perfor-
    mance. Ann Surg. 2006;243(3):411–7.
26. Dimick JB, Osborne NH, Hall BL, Ko CY, Birkmeyer JD. Risk
    adjustment for comparing hospital quality with surgery: how
    many variables are needed? J Am Coll Surg. 2010;210(4):503–8.
27. Ibrahim AM, Regenbogen SE, Thumma JR, Dimick
    JB. Emergency surgery for medicare beneficiaries admitted to
    critical access hospitals. Ann Surg. 2018;267(3):473–7.
28. Tu JV, Sykora K, Naylor CD. Assessing the outcomes of coro-
    nary artery bypass graft surgery: how many risk factors are
    enough? Steering Committee of the Cardiac Care Network of
    Ontario. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1997;30(5):1317–23.
29. Dimick JB, Staiger DO, Birkmeyer JD. Ranking hospitals on sur-
    gical mortality: the importance of reliability adjustment. Health
    Serv Res. 2010;45(6 Pt 1):1614–29.
20     R. Howard and J. B. Dimick

30. Staiger DO, Dimick JB, Baser O, Fan Z, Birkmeyer JD. Empirically
    derived composite measures of surgical performance. Med Care.
    2009;47(2):226–33.
31. Jaffe TA, Hasday SJ, Dimick JB. Power outage-inadequate sur-
    geon performance measures leave patients in the dark. JAMA
    Surg. 2016;151(7):599–600.
32. Stulberg JJ, Huang R, Kreutzer L, et al. Association between
    surgeon technical skills and patient outcomes. JAMA Surg.
    2020;155:960–8.
33. Dimick JB, Varban OA. Surgical video analysis: an emerg-
    ing tool for improving surgeon performance. BMJ Qual Saf.
    2015;24(8):490–1.
34. Ghaferi AA, Birkmeyer JD, Dimick JB. Variation in hospital
    mortality associated with inpatient surgery. N Engl J Med.
    2009;361(14):1368–75.
35. Ibrahim AM, Dimick JB. Redesigning the delivery of spe-
    cialty care within newly formed hospital networks. N Engl J
    Med Catalyst. Mar 30, 2017. http://catalyst.nejm.org/redesigning-­
    specialty-­care-­delivery. Accessed 26 Aug 2020.
Chapter 2
Never Events in Surgery
Anjali A. Gresens and Jacob A. Tatum




Introduction
“Never events” were first introduced in 2001 by Dr. Ken
Kizer, former CEO of the National Quality Forum (NQF)
organization that promotes patient safety and quality health-
care [1]. The term refers to medical errors and events that are
so egregious that they should be avoidable, preventable, and
never occur, such as wrong-site surgery or surgery performed
on the wrong patient [2]. Though these might seem shocking,
serious preventable surgical errors occur every year despite
considerable patient safety initiatives. Overall, medical errors
are suspected to contribute to over 251,000 deaths per year
in the United States, with an estimated 4000 surgical never


A. A. Gresens (*)
Bariatric Surgery, Sentara Medical Group, Norfolk, VA, USA
Department of Surgery, Eastern Virginia Medical School,
Norfolk, VA, USA
e-mail: AAGresen@sentara.com
J. A. Tatum
Department of Surgery, Eastern Virginia Medical School,
Norfolk, VA, USA
e-mail: TatumJA@evms.edu

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature   21
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_2
22    A. A. Gresens and J. A. Tatum

events occurring yearly [3]. Globally, Haynes et al. estimate a
rate of serious incidents occurring in 1/10,000 patients, with
up to one million deaths per year [4, 5]. While an individual
hospital may only see a wrong-site surgery every 5–10 years,
other serious errors may occur more frequently causing
undue harm to many patients. From 2007 to 2019, 71% of
never events reported to the Joint Commission resulted in
fatality [1].
   Medical errors and adverse events in healthcare impose a
costly toll not only on the patient involved but also to the
providers and the institution. The burden is mental as well as
financial and can be devastating. In 2011, data from the NQF
estimated that serious reportable errors lead to $5.7 billion in
additional healthcare costs. When including healthcare
expenses, lost productivity, lost income, and disability, costs
may exceed $29 billion per year in the United States [6].


 nderstanding What Events Are Classified by
U
the NQF as “Never Events” in Surgery
Never events should be preventable, and no patient should
die from these types of medical errors. In 2002, Dr. Kizer and
the NQF proposed a list of serious reportable events to
increase accountability and consumer access to critical infor-
mation and healthcare performance. The goal was to advance
the delivery of safe and high-quality healthcare through
research, investigation, and collaboration. NQF aimed to
facilitate standardized reporting that was uniform across sys-
tems, leading to systematic nationwide improvements in
patient safety. To be categorized as a “serious reportable
event” (SRE) or “never event” according to the NQF, an
event must be [7]:
• Unambiguous—clearly identifiable and measurable and
  thus feasible to include in a reporting system
• Usually preventable—recognizing that some events are
  not always avoidable, given the complexity of healthcare
• Serious—resulting in death or loss of a body part, disabil-
  ity, or more than transient loss of a body function
                     Chapter 2.     Never Events in Surgery   23

   Additionally, events included on the list are any of the
following:
• Adverse
• Indicative of a problem in a healthcare facility’s safety
  systems
• Important for public credibility or public accountability
   Some of these events should absolutely never occur.
Others are largely preventable with increased education and
improved prevention programs and should trend near zero.
The objective of identifying these SREs and never events was
not to penalize hospitals and programs but to promote
patient safety and advance quality improvement efforts.
Reporting is voluntary, but every healthcare organization
should be in favor of pursuing research efforts that would
identify vulnerabilities. Only by identification can issues be
addressed and improved. All organizations are held account-
able by their patients, providers, staff, and community in
terms of the quality of care they provide, and every organiza-
tion should strive for the highest-quality care and patient
safety measures.
   The original list of SREs has evolved into 29 serious
reportable events grouped into 7 categories:
•   Surgical or procedural events
•   Product or device events
•   Patient protection events
•   Care management events
•   Environmental events
•   Radiologic events
•   Criminal events
  A complete list of NQF serious reportable events/never
events is found in Table 2.1 [8]. Twenty-six states and the
District of Columbia have mandated reporting of SREs [9].
Because each state has a variable approach to reporting
SREs, a nationwide effort to learn from these events and
enact change is limited.
24     A. A. Gresens and J. A. Tatum

Table 2.1 National Quality Forum serious reportable events/never
events [8]
Surgical events
Surgery or other invasive procedure performed on the wrong site
Surgery or other invasive procedure performed on the wrong
patient
Wrong surgical or other invasive procedure performed on a
patient
Unintended retention of a foreign object in a patient after
surgery or other invasive procedure
Intraoperative or immediately postoperative/postprocedure death
in an ASA Class 1 patient
Product of device events
Patient death or serious injury associated with the use of
contaminated drugs, devices, or biologics provided by the
healthcare setting
Patient death or serious injury associated with the use or
function of a device in patient care, in which the device is used or
functions other than as intended
Patient death or serious injury associated with intravascular air
embolism that occurs while being cared for in a healthcare setting
Patient protection events
Discharge or release of a patient/resident of any age, who is
unable to make decisions, to other than an authorized person
Patient death or serious injury associated with patient elopement
(disappearance)
Patient suicide, attempted suicide, or self-harm that results in
serious injury while being cared for in a healthcare setting
Care management events
Patient death or serious injury associated with a medication error
(e.g., errors involving the wrong drug, wrong dose, wrong patient,
wrong time, wrong rate, wrong preparation, or wrong route of
administration)
                        Chapter 2.   Never Events in Surgery           25

Table 2.1 (continued)
Patient death or serious injury associated with unsafe
administration of blood products
Maternal death or serious injury associated with labor or delivery
in a low-risk pregnancy while being cared for in a healthcare
setting
Death or serious injury of a neonate associated with labor or
delivery in a low-risk pregnancy
Patient death or serious injury associated with a fall while being
cared for in a healthcare setting
Any Stage 3, Stage 4, and unstageable pressure ulcers acquired
after admission/presentation to a healthcare setting
Artificial insemination with the wrong donor sperm or wrong egg
Patient death or serious injury resulting from the irretrievable
loss of an irreplaceable biological specimen
Patient death or serious injury resulting from failure to follow up
or communicate laboratory, pathology, or radiology test results
Environmental events
Patient or staff death or serious injury associated with an electric
shock in the course of a patient care process in a healthcare
setting
Any incident in which systems designated for oxygen or other gas
to be delivered to a patient contain no gas, the wrong gas, or are
contaminated by toxic substances
Patient or staff death or serious injury associated with a burn
incurred from any source in the course of a patient care process
in a healthcare setting
Patient death or serious injury associated with the use of physical
restraints or bedrails while being cared for in a healthcare setting
Radiologic events
Death or serious injury of a patient or staff associated with the
introduction of a metallic object into the MRI area

                                                           (continued)
26     A. A. Gresens and J. A. Tatum

Table 2.1 (continued)
Potential criminal events
Any instance of care ordered by or provided by someone
impersonating a physician, nurse, pharmacist, or other licensed
healthcare provider
Abduction of a patient/resident of any age
Sexual abuse/assault on a patient or staff member within or on
the grounds of a healthcare setting
Death or serious injury of a patient or staff member resulting
from a physical assault (i.e., battery) that occurs within or on the
grounds of a healthcare setting



 nderstanding What Events Are Classified by
U
CMS as “Never Events” in Surgery
The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS)
have placed increasing pressure on healthcare institutions to
eliminate never events and SREs. In August 2007, CMS
announced a “nonreimbursable” policy in which they would
no longer pay for costs associated with certain SREs and
medical complications. These events are also referred to as
hospital-acquired conditions (HACs) or even “no pay”
events. Following the lead of CMS, several states and private
insurance companies enacted similar policies for their reim-
bursements. CMS hoped that this new directive would stimu-
late patient safety protocols to be implemented on an
accelerated timeline, therefore reducing the incidence of
these complications and their subsequent payouts.
    While the CMS list of never events and nonreimbursable
HACs is very similar to the SREs defined by the NQF, the
lists do differ. Indisputable never events as defined by CMS
include surgery performed on the wrong body part, surgery
performed on the wrong patient, and performing the wrong
surgical procedure on a patient. However, the list of CMS
never events and “nonreimbursable”/“no pay” events is
expanded to include additional serious adverse events that
may not be entirely preventable [10]. Table 2.2 shows the
                        Chapter 2.    Never Events in Surgery        27

Table 2.2 Comparison of “never events: defined by the NQF (“seri-
ous reportable events”) versus CMS (“nonreimbursable serious
hospital-acquired conditions”) [8, 11, 12]
“Never” and “no pay”
Events which overlap between NQF and CMS definitions of
“never events”
 Surgery on the wrong body part
 Surgery on the wrong patient
 Wrong surgery on a patient
 Foreign body left in patient after surgery
 Death/disability associated with intravascular air embolism
 Death/disability associated with incompatible blood
 Stage 3 or 4 pressure ulcers after admission
 Death/disability associated with electric shock
 Death/disability associated with a burn incurred within
   facility
 Death/disability associated with a fall within facility
“Never”
Events which should never happen according to the NQF SRE
list but are not listed on the CMS HAC list
 Postoperative death in a healthy patient
 Implantation of wrong egg
 Death/disability associated with the use of contaminated
   drugs, devices, or biologics
 Death/disability associated with use of device other than as
   intended
 Patient of any age discharged to the wrong person
 Death/disability due to patient elopement
 Patient suicide or attempted suicide resulting in disability
                                                             (continued)
28     A. A. Gresens and J. A. Tatum

Table 2.2 (continued)
 Death/disability associated with medication error
 Maternal death/disability with low-risk delivery
 Incident due to wrong oxygen or other gas
 Death/disability associated with the use of restraints within
   facility
 Impersonating a healthcare provider (i.e., physician or nurse)
 Abduction of a patient
 Sexual assault of a patient within or on facility grounds
 Death/disability resulting from physical assault within/on
   facility grounds
“No pay”
Adverse events which are classified by the CMS as
nonreimbursable HACs but lack the according definition of
SRE by the NQF
 Death/disability associated with poor glycemic control
   (diabetic ketoacidosis, nonketotic hyperosmolar coma,
   hypoglycemic coma, secondary diabetes with ketoacidosis,
   secondary diabetes with hyperosmolarity)
 Catheter-associated urinary tract infection
 Vascular catheter-associated infection
 Surgical site infection following coronary artery bypass graft
   (CABG), mediastinitis
 Surgical site infection following bariatric surgery
   (laparoscopic gastric bypass, gastroenterostomy, laparoscopic
   gastric restrictive surgery)
 Surgical site infection following orthopedic procedures (spine,
   neck, shoulder, and elbow)
 Deep vein thrombosis (DVT)/pulmonary embolism (PE) in
   total knee replacement and hip replacement
 Iatrogenic pneumothorax with venous catheterization
                      Chapter 2.   Never Events in Surgery      29

complete list of CMS never events and nonreimbursable
HACs, highlighting the overlap with the NQF list.


 iscussing the Ramifications of “No Pay” After
D
the Occurrence of a Never Event
The CMS “no pay” initiative went into effect in 2008.
Payments were withheld from hospitals for designated HACs
as laid out in Table 2.2. For true never events like wrong sur-
geries, if CMS deemed that these events were unreasonable
or unnecessary, they would not pay for the corresponding
hospital or physician services. The other HACs are a bit more
complex. In the past, sicker patients with more comorbidities
would be placed in a higher-paying diagnosis-related group
(DRG) that would increase the reimbursement to the hospi-
tal. When this “no pay” initiative went into effect, the CMS
designated HACs would no longer trigger entrance into a
higher-paying DRG unless these conditions were present on
hospital admission [13]. The amount of money being paid out
for these events was relatively small, only $20 million, but the
real driving force for CMS was to make hospitals safer for
patients. As a result of this policy, hospitals were forced to
implement quality improvement projects and reexamine how
care was provided. Unquestionably, a focus on patient safety
was a positive development. Hospitals created patient safety
committees and developed checklists, and administrators
began to examine patient care. However, as new protocols
were put into place, it was evident that there is no such thing
as a true “never event.” Quality improved and SREs decreased
in frequency, but despite all heroic efforts adverse events still
happen [2].
   In regard to hospital-acquired patient falls, Fehlberg et al.
found that the CMS “no pay” initiative significantly increased
the utilization of fall prevention strategies without significantly
decreasing the incidence of falls. Fall prevention protocols,
such as bed alarms and sitters, were increasingly implemented
by nurses as they reported significant pressure from their
30    A. A. Gresens and J. A. Tatum

administrators to prevent falls, taking on increasing personal
responsibility. Despite these increased measures, in-hospital
falls were not significantly reduced or eliminated. The system-
wide policy only seemed to increase resource utilization and
employee stress without much evidence that these measures
lead to their intended outcome [14]. Even with the best possi-
ble care, falls and injuries can occur due to medication impair-
ments, dementia, and other disease impairments.
   This is not to say that CMS efforts have failed to make any
difference in patient safety: Tracked HACs have decreased
over time as hospitals wish to optimize their reimbursement
statuses. From 2010 to 2017, the overall reduction in HACs
was estimated to be 4.5% annually [15]. The Agency for
Healthcare Research and Quality estimates that 910,000
fewer HACs have occurred since 2014 and up to 2.1 million
fewer events since 2011. This translates into nearly a $20 bil-
lion cost savings and 87,000 fewer HAC-related inpatient
deaths [15].
   As progress has been made, the initial CMS “no pay” ini-
tiative for never events has evolved over the last decade. Not
only is payment withheld for services related to wrong sur-
geries and HACs not present on admission, but CMS now
penalizes hospitals who fail to report these events with reduc-
tions in their overall reimbursements. By 2015, the Inpatient
Quality Reporting (IQR) program was instituted and required
hospitals to meet certain quality reporting measures. Hospitals
who failed to submit reports, regardless of their quality, would
see a 25% reduction in their annual payment rates [16].
   Despite all of these initiatives, never events and HACs
have not been eliminated. It is estimated that 9 HACs still
occur out of every 100 discharges [17]. To further reduce this
rate, the Affordable Care Act developed the Hospital-­
Acquired Conditions Reduction Program (HACRP), effec-
tive in fiscal year 2015. The HACRP identifies the 25%
worst-performing hospitals in relation to quality measures
and reduces their annual Medicare payments by 1% regard-
less of condition [18]. Though well-intentioned, the HACRP
has failed to meet goals of improving patient outcomes, and
                      Chapter 2.   Never Events in Surgery    31

hospitals have several concerns about the program overall in
terms of fairness. Large, urban, public teaching hospitals are
significantly more likely to be penalized than small, rural,
private nonteaching hospitals based on HACRP grading cri-
teria [13]. The program does not adequately provide risk
adjustment for teaching hospitals or low socioeconomic
populations with increased medical comorbidities. From a
surgical perspective, surgical site infections under the HACRP
are not risk adjusted for preoperative diagnosis, elective ver-
sus emergent case status, or patient immunosuppression sta-
tus [7]. This disproportionally affects academic and tertiary
care hospitals who care for the sickest and most vulnerable
patients who are the most susceptible to HACs. For another
example, if hospitals are being graded based on urinary
catheter-based infections and central venous catheter-based
infections, one way to improve those outcomes would be to
avoid placing these catheters altogether [17]. A small private
hospital is more likely to transfer sicker patients to a tertiary
care center, thus avoiding being penalized for a potential
HAC and causing the accepting hospital to endure the
consequences.
   Undoubtedly, there is work to be done as these programs
continue to evolve. Hospitals must operate within the con-
fines of the established laws and are at the mercy of the CMS
guidelines and reimbursement policies of private insurers.
Clearer guidelines must be established along with risk adjust-
ment and better auditing so that all hospitals are treated
fairly and not disproportionately penalized. The focus must
remain on patient safety and providing quality care rather
than prioritizing the financial bottom line.


 iscussing What Systemic Answers Are
D
for the Purpose of Preventing Never Events
As never events continue to be reported every year, signifi-
cant effort has been made to study their prevention. Human
error and failures in communication are prominent themes
32    A. A. Gresens and J. A. Tatum

behind the causes of these events. Thus, many of the strategies
used in preventing never events revolve around standardiza-
tion, most often by using checklists or establishing protocols.
The Joint Commission found that 13% of SREs between 1995
and 2006 were due to wrong-site surgery. In further analysis,
76% were performed on the wrong site, 13% were performed
on the wrong patient, and 11% involved the wrong proce-
dure. They made it their goal to eliminate wrong-site surgery
and announced the implementation of the Universal Protocol
for Preventing Wrong Site, Wrong Procedure, and Wrong
Person Surgery™ in 2003, mandating its use in hospitals the
following year. This protocol requires preoperative verifica-
tion of the procedure, a pre-procedural time out, and site
marking for the proposed procedure. Several professional
organizations, such as the American College of Surgeons,
have adopted this protocol and recommend its use to proce-
dures outside of the operating room. In 2008, the World
Health Organization (WHO) established a 19-point Surgical
Safety Checklist for reducing surgical complications and
death. A study of nearly 8000 patients showed a significant
decrease in inpatient complications from 11% to 7% after
implementation [19].
   The pre-procedural time-out, also known as the “surgical
pause,” is perhaps the most well-known and widely regarded
part of the Universal Protocol to be implemented and has
proven to be effective in reducing errors [20]. Time-outs have
become ubiquitous and are used before every surgery, outpa-
tient procedure, and even small procedures done in the office
or at a patient’s bedside. Pre-procedural time-outs involve the
entire team and are composed of a standardized checklist
that reviews the relevant patient data, planned procedure,
potential risks, and other factors. As recently as 2020, a study
from the United Kingdom showed that no wrong-site opera-
tions were performed in over 29,000 surgical cases when
using a standardized checklist, as 86 wrong-site list errors
were caught and corrected ahead of time [21]. Outside of
surgery, anesthesia literature noted a reduction in incidence
of wrong-site spinal blockade after instituting their own pre-­
procedural checklist [22]. In interventional radiology, a
                       Chapter 2.   Never Events in Surgery      33

review of CT-guided procedures encompassing biopsies and
drainages noted that a pre-procedural checklist was able to
identify safety concerns in 18% of cases. These errors were
then resolved prior to the procedure’s start. A follow-up sur-
vey also showed improvement in the subjective experience of
the team and overall team cohesiveness [23].
    Likewise, surgical site marking has become a standard
procedure to reduce wrong-site surgery. Because site identifi-
cation is most important in instances of laterality, multiple
structures, or multiple levels, the Canadian Orthopaedic
Association recommended “marking the incision with a per-
manent marker” in 1994. The American Academy of
Orthopaedic Surgeons launched their “Sign Your Site” cam-
paign in 1998 before the Universal Protocol mandated surgi-
cal site marking in 2004 [19]. Marking allows each member of
the team, including the patient, a chance to identify a wrong-­
site error before it occurs. The importance of marking is well
demonstrated by a study of ophthalmologists who were able
to correctly identify the intended site for operation in only
76.5% of cases by patient name alone and only 87% after
looking at the patient [24]. Appropriate site marking and use
of the Universal Protocol have shown to significantly reduce
the incidence of wrong-site surgery from 0.16% to 0.02% as
shown in the neurosurgical literature [25]. While there have
been various case reports of breakdowns in marking, such as
ink-transfers between sites and patient tattoos causing confu-
sion, these case reports are largely anecdotal and have been
resolved before harm comes to patients [26, 27]. There is little
to no downside to marking the patient, and multiple studies
have demonstrated that the marking process does not affect
the sterility of the procedure [28, 29].
    To further prevent instances of wrong-site surgery and
wrong implants, technology is being increasingly implemented
in the operating room. In spinal surgery, intraoperative X-ray is
used to reaffirm the correct level prior to incision [30]. It is also
common practice for relevant imaging to be displayed in the
room and discussed during the time-out so that every team
member is aware of the planned intervention. Orthopedic sur-
gery literature demonstrates a database of components used in
34    A. A. Gresens and J. A. Tatum

hip and knee replacements that will notify the surgical team if
their combination of prosthetic components is compatible, thus
avoiding potentially disastrous mechanical failures. The imple-
mentation of the database reduced the rates of incompatibility
from 0.14% to 0.06% across thousands of procedures [31].
While the benefit of this technology can be dramatic, it is
important to note that these methods are still subject to user
error and require a level of proficiency to be effective.
   An even more prominent example of a systemic solution
relates to one of the most common never events: retained
foreign bodies. Retained foreign bodies, often surgical sponges
or needles, almost always cause harm to the patient. The best-­
case scenario for the patient is a prolonged hospital stay, but
retained objects can result in infection, reoperation, damage
to other structures, and even death. The introduction of radio-
frequency (RF)-tagged sponges and scanners has greatly
reduced the incidence of retained foreign bodies after opera-
tions. Sponge and instrument counts should be performed at
the end of every procedure but are skipped or missed in
upwards of 45% of cases. Even when counts are performed,
these RF devices have found retained sponges despite the
correct human count [32]. A very large study of over 13,000
procedures examined sponge counts before and after imple-
mentation of these RF devices. The authors found an almost
70% reduction in unreconciled sponge counts using the
device. From a cost-benefit standpoint, the use of RF devices
resulted in overall reduced costs from saved operating room
time and postoperative radiographs due to incorrect counts.
Several events of retained sponges were successfully avoided,
thus reducing medical and legal fees [33]. However, these
devices are only part of the solution as they require the
sponges used in a case to have the associated detection chip
and require the present team to use the device in the first
place. Postprocedure time-outs and checklists have been
implemented in some institutions as a potential response.
   While human error contributes significantly to never
events, the literature also refers to failures of communication
within the team. Indeed, the Joint Commission believes
upward of 56% of never events relate to communication
                     Chapter 2.   Never Events in Surgery      35

breakdowns [34]. Even if all protocols are followed, harm can
still ensue if the problems identified by these procedures are
not brought to the team’s attention. A survey of vascular sur-
gery residents noted that residents often did not feel empow-
ered to voice concerns due to the perceived hierarchy
established in the operating room [35]. Even the standardized
time-out process becomes fallible if not adhered to correctly.
One study noted that in 10% of observed time-outs, at least
one team member was actively distracted [36]. Another sur-
vey of circulating nurses reported that 94% of participants
had, at one time or another, experienced active hostility
toward the time-out from other members of the surgical team
[37]. Even the best protocols and operations can be rendered
useless if there is not appropriate buy-in by all team mem-
bers, as the problems identified cannot be brought to those
able to correct them. An overall culture of safety needs to be
established that allows for buy-in by all teams and open com-
munication among them to ensure patients are kept safe.
Teams that consistently work together in the same environ-
ment are more comfortable raising alarms because they can
recognize red flags and are more likely to have camaraderie
that values each member’s opinion.
    Great effort has been made toward eliminating never
events in the last two decades which has resulted in much
success across the whole of the surgery community. Despite
their name, “never events” do still occur and continue to be
reported. With ongoing efforts and advancing technology,
these numbers will continue to decrease, and we can hope
that one day these events are a thing of the past.


References
1. Never events. In: Patient safety primer. Agency for Healthcare
   Research and Quality, Rockville. 2019. https://psnet.ahrq.gov/
   primer/never-­events. Accessed 4 Nov 2020.
2. Fischer JE. Never events. In: Tichansky DS, Morton J, Jones DB,
   editors. The SAGES manual of quality, outcomes and patient
   safety. Boston: Springer; 2012. p. 1–8.
36     A. A. Gresens and J. A. Tatum

 3. Anderson JG, Abrahamson K. Your health care may kill you:
    medical errors. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2017;234:13–7.
 4. Haynes AB, Weiser TG, Berry WR, Lipsitz SR, Breizat AH,
    Dellinger EP, et al. A surgical safety checklist to reduce morbid-
    ity and mortality in a global population. NEJM. 2009;360(5):491–
    9. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMsa0810119.
 5. Koleva SI. A literature review exploring common factors
    contributing to Never Events in surgery. J Perioper Pract.
    2020;30(9):256–64. https://doi.org/10.1177/1750458919886182.
 6. SRE Fact Sheet. Serious Reportable Events NQF. 2011. www.
    qualityforum.org. Accessed 4 Nov 2020.
 7. National Quality Forum (NQF), Serious Reportable Events In
    Healthcare—2011 update: a consensus report, Washington, DC:
    NQF; 2011.
 8. List of SREs. National Quality Forum, Washington, DC. 2020.
    http://www.qualityforum.org/Topics/SREs/List_of_SREs.
    aspx#sre1. Accessed 18 Oct 2020.
 9. Variability of State Reporting of Adverse Events. National
    Quality Forum, Washington, DC. 2011. http://www.qualityforum.
    org/Topics/SREs/List_of_SREs.aspx#sre1. Accessed 18 Oct 2020.
10. CMS.gov: CMS improves patient safety for Medicare and
    Medicaid services by addressing never events. Centers for
    Medicaid & Medicare Services, Baltimore. 2008. https://www.
    cms.gov/newsroom/fact-­s heets/cms-­i mproves-­p atient-­s afety-­
    medicare-­and-­medicaid-­addressing-­never-­events. Accessed 14
    Nov 2020.
11. Lembitz A, Clarke TJ. Clarifying “never events and introduc-
    ing” always events. Patient Saf Surg. 2009;3:26. https://doi.
    org/10.1186/1754-­9493-­3-­26.
12. CMS.gov: Hospital-acquired conditions. Centers for Medicaid
    & Medicare Services, Baltimore. 2020. https://www.cms.gov/
    medicare/medicare-­fee-­for-­service-­payment/hospitalacqcond/
    hospital-­acquired_conditions. Accessed 14 Nov 2020.
13. Cassidy A. Health policy brief: medicare’s hospital-acquired
    condition reduction program. Health Aff 2015. https://www.
    healthaffairs.org/do/10.1377/hpb20150806.512738/full/healthpol-
    icybrief_142.pdf. Accessed 14 Nov 2020.
14. Fehlberg EA, Lucero RJ, Weaver MT, McDaniel AM, Chandler
    AM, Richey PA, et al. Impact of the CMS no-pay policy on
    hospital-acquired fall prevention related practice patterns. Innov
    Aging. 2018;1(3):1–7. https://doi.org/10.1093/geroni/igx036.
                       Chapter 2.   Never Events in Surgery      37

15. AHRQ national scorecard on hospital-acquired conditions
    updated baseline rates and preliminary results 2014–2017. Agency
    for Healthcare Research and Quality, Rockville. Accessed 14
    Nov 2020. 2019. https://www.ahrq.gov/sites/default/files/wysiwyg/
    professionals/quality-­patient-­safety/pfp/hacreport-­2019.pdf.
16. CMS.gov: Hospital Inpatient Quality Reporting Program. Centers
    for Medicaid & Medicare Services, Baltimore. 2017. https://
    www.cms.gov/Medicare/Quality-­Initiatives-­Patient-­Assessment-­
    Instruments/HospitalQualityInits/HospitalRHQDAPU.
    Accessed 14 Nov 2020.
17. Lawton EJ, Sheetz KH, Ryan AM. Improving the hospital-­
    acquired condition reduction program through rulemak-
    ing. JAMA Health Forum. 2020. https://doi.org/10.1001/
    jamahealthforum.2020.0416.
18. CMS.gov: Hospital-Acquired Condition Reduction Program.
    Centers for Medicaid & Medicare Services, Baltimore. 2020.
    https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Medicare-­Fee-­f or-­S ervice-­
    Payment/AcuteInpatientPPS/HAC-­R eduction-­P rogram.
    Accessed 14 Nov 2020.
19. WHO Guidelines for Safe Surgery 2009: Safe surgery saves
    lives. WHO Guidelines Approved by the Guidelines Review
    Committee. World Health Organization, Geneva. 2009. http://
    www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK143243/.
20. The WHO safer surgery checklist time out procedure revis-
    ited: strategies to optimise compliance and safety. Int J Surg.
    2019;69:19–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijsu.2019.07.006.
21. Geraghty A, Ferguson L, McIlhenny C, Bowie P. Incidence of
    wrong-site surgery list errors for a 2-year period in a single
    national health service board. J Patient Saf. 2020;16:79–83.
    https://doi.org/10.1097/PTS.0000000000000426.
22. Henshaw DS, Turner JD, Dobson SW, Jaffe JD, Reynolds JW,
    Edwards CJ, Weller RS. Preprocedural Checklist for Regional
    Anesthesia: Impact on the Incidence of Wrong Site Nerve
    Blockade (an 8-Year Perspective). Reg Anesth Pain Med.
    2019;44:201–5. https://doi.org/10.1136/rapm-­2018-­0 00033.
23. Dommaraju S, Siewert B, OʼBryan B, Swedeen S, Appel E,
    Nakhaei M, Camacho A, Brook OR. Impact of preprocedure
    time-out checklist for computed tomography-guided proce-
    dures on workflow and patient safety. J Comput Assist Tomogr.
    2019;43:892–7. https://doi.org/10.1097/RCT.0000000000000940.
38     A. A. Gresens and J. A. Tatum

24. Pikkel D, Sharabi-Nov A, Pikkel J. The importance of side
    marking in preventing surgical site errors. Int Risk Saf Med.
    2014;26:133–8. https://doi.org/10.3233/JRS-­140621.
25. Vachhani JA, Klopfenstein JD. Incidence of neurosurgical
    wrong-site surgery before and after implementation of the
    universal protocol. Neurosurgery. 2013;72(4):590–5. https://doi.
    org/10.1227/NEU.0b013e318283c9ea.
26. Moseley G, Oborski Y, Mayorchak Y, Yau L-A, Flynn P. Ink
    transfer in pre-operative marking: a patient safety issue? ANZ J
    Surg. 2020;90:187–8. https://doi.org/10.1111/ans.15412.
27. Edlin JC, Kanagasabay R. Risk of operating on the wrong site:
    how to avoid a never event. BMJ Case Reports 2018 (May 7,
    2018). https://doi.org/10.1136/bcr-­2017-­223704.
28. Cullan DB, Wongworawat MD. Sterility of the sur-
    gical site marking between the ink and the epidermis. J
    Am Coll Surg. 2007;205:319–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
    jamcollsurg.2007.02.029.
29. Rooney J, Khoo OKS, Higgs AR, Small TJ, Bell S. Surgical site
    marking does not affect sterility. ANZ J Surg. 2008;78:688–9.
    https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1445-­2197.2008.04618.x.d.
30. Odgaard A, Laursen MB, Gromov K, Troelsen A, Kristensen PW,
    Schrøder H, Madsen F, Overgaard S. Mismatch ‘never events’ in
    hip and knee arthroplasty: a cohort and intervention study. Bone
    Joint J. 2019;101B:960–9.
31. DeVine JG, Chutkan N, Gloystein D, Jackson K. An update on
    wrong-site spine surgery. Global Spine J. 2020;10:41S–4S. https://
    doi.org/10.1177/2192568219846911.
32. Steelman VM, Shaw C, Shine L, Hardy-Fairbanks AJ. Retained
    surgical sponges: a descriptive study of 319 occurrences and con-
    tributing factors from 2012 to 2017. Patient Saf Surg. 2018;12:20.
    https://doi.org/10.1186/s13037-­0 18-­0 166-­0.
33. Steelman VM, Schaapveld AG, Storm HE, Perkhounkova Y,
    Shane DM. The effect of radiofrequency technology on time
    spent searching for surgical sponges and associated costs. AORN
    J. 2019;109:718–27. https://doi.org/10.1002/aorn.12698.
34. Etherington N, Wu M, Cheng-Boivin O, Larrigan S, Boet
    S. Interprofessional communication in the operating room:
    a narrative review to advance research and practice. Can J
    Anesth/J Can Anesth. 2019;66:1251–60. https://doi.org/10.1007/
    s12630-­0 19-­0 1413-­9.
35. Lear R, Godfrey AD, Riga C, Norton C, Vincent C, Bicknell
    CD. Surgeons’ perceptions of the causes of preventable harm in
                       Chapter 2.    Never Events in Surgery       39

    arterial surgery: a mixed-methods study. Eur J Vasc Endovasc
    Surg. 2017;54:778–86. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejvs.2017.10.003.
36. Freundlich RE, Bulka CM, Wanderer JP, Rothman BS, Sandberg
    WS, Ehrenfeld JM. Prospective investigation of the operating
    room time-out process. Anesth Analg. 2020;130:725–9.
37. Jones N. Tune-in and time-out: toward surgeon-led preven-
    tion of ‘never’ Events. J Patient Saf. 2019;15:e36–9. https://doi.
    org/10.1097/PTS.0000000000000259.
Chapter 3
Creating a Surgical
Dashboard for Quality
Samuel M. Miller and John M. Morton



The objectives for this chapter should be:
• To describe the characteristics of a surgical quality
  dashboard
• To discuss AHRQ patient safety indicators (PSIs) and how
  they are important to include on dashboards


Introduction
Quality continues to evolve as a focus within the healthcare
and surgical communities. With more information at our fin-
gertips than ever before, comparisons between countries,
healthcare systems, and individual providers have become an
assumed part of patients’ research before they choose where
to receive care. Complications occur in approximately 15% of
surgical cases [1]. Many of these complications are prevent-
able, yet despite numerous interventions designed to limit
errors and improve patient safety, these numbers continue to
rise. Whether it be a review posted by an established patient

S. M. Miller · J. M. Morton (*)
Department of Surgery, Yale School of Medicine,
New Haven, CT, USA
e-mail: John.morton@yale.edu

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature   41
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_3
42    S. M. Miller and J. M. Morton

in a public forum online, or a manuscript published in a peer-­
reviewed journal, there can be comfort in knowing that your
surgeon has laudable outcomes.
   Healthcare institutions continue to look for strategies
employed in other fields that may prove useful in the delivery
of medical care. Checklists have become an integral part of
the operating room as the “time-out” confirms that the entire
team is aware of the patient’s identity, pertinent medical his-
tory, and unique requirements for the upcoming procedure.
Algorithms have been built into disease workup as we decide
on imaging for a patient with right lower quadrant pain or
when to give steroids after a spinal trauma. Nevertheless, as
the ability to obtain quantitative data continues to improve,
we have not developed an efficient method of analyzing and
implementing practical change in the delivery of care.
   The surgical dashboard has been proposed as part of the
solution to improve surgical quality. This condensed display
of pertinent information, much like that in a car or airplane,
offers the user insight into the workings of his or her machine
at present and in the recent past.
   Initially developed in the 1970s, their popularity has risen
significantly in the last 50 years. These dashboards were
designed to present graphical data that made it easy to recog-
nize trends, whether positive or negative. This insight allowed
for the identification of areas that needed improvement and
also for the evaluation of previous interventions.
   Surgical quality dashboards have become even more com-
mon over the past decade. With electronic health records
having become an integral part of our healthcare system and
the increased collection and distribution of health outcomes
data, we have access to more data than ever before. Our
increasing ability to collect and disseminate these data
quickly allows for real-time feedback and focused adjust-
ments in practice. However, with the available data having
increased exponentially, it has become more difficult to parse
through the troves of information to find those measures that
are clinically relevant. Clinicians are often left wanting for a
means to efficiently digest this information so that they can
    Chapter 3. Creating a Surgical Dashboard for Quality      43

incorporate it into their practice. The most effective dash-
boards of today allow a surgeon to quickly identify trends in
their personal practice as well as draw comparisons to col-
leagues, whether at the institutional or national level.


 haracteristics of a Surgical Quality
C
Dashboard
The ideal surgical quality dashboard will combine several
characteristics that allow for its efficient use. First and fore-
most is simplicity. The user should be able to glance at the
dashboard and immediately surmise the general tone of the
information that is presented. This can be accomplished in
many different ways, including using colors to denote positive
(green) and negative (red) results or emoticons like “smiley
faces” or “thumbs up.” While there may be many pieces of
information displayed on this dashboard, it is helpful to have
one message that is central on the page. Depending on the
day, this focus can be placed on a particular metric in which
the user excels or an area which might require attention or
improvement. This simple theme serves two purposes: to
frame the rest of the information that is to follow on the dash-
board and to be the sole takeaway if the user is to navigate
away from the dashboard without reading further. The act of
choosing the data can become an exercise in prioritization for
the hospital or health system.
   The surgical dashboard must also filter for data that is
relevant. In today’s world of the electronic health record and
national databases, not all data are created equal. It can be
difficult to discern which data are clinically impactful. An
effective surgical quality dashboard will do just this. Relevant
data will vary between different users, different practice
types, and different practice settings. In this way, the dash-
board must be customizable by the user. One surgeon may be
focused on shortening the length of inpatient stay for his
patients, while another may be working to limit those of her
patients that are discharged with a prescription for narcotics.
44    S. M. Miller and J. M. Morton

Whatever the concern, the dashboard must be built to reflect
accurate and relevant information that is tailored to the
user’s preference. Additionally, the data should be actionable
or contemporary. Finally, if an outcome is rare, perhaps,
observation of processes should be emphasized. For example,
surgical site infections may occur only 5% of cases, but the
process of giving antibiotics preoperatively will occur on
every case as appropriate. The key relationship here is that
the process must be closely linked to the outcome.
   The surgical quality dashboard must effectively display the
user’s current metrics to allow for easy comparison. Often,
these data are presented in a graphical manner to allow for
the easy identification of trends and should abide by the same
principles mentioned previously – the presentation should be
simple and relevant. Options should be available to view
chronological comparisons with the user’s past data as well as
with current data at institutional and national levels. This
provides feedback to areas in which the user might be excel-
ling and also those where the user needs to focus attention
and improve. It is also worthwhile to provide users with insti-
tutional comparisons. This can inspire camaraderie among
practitioners and can lay groundwork for quality improve-
ment projects at the departmental and institutional levels.
There can be more in-depth presentation via run charts which
can graphically represent progress in quality improvement
initiatives.


Dashboard Metrics
The ultimate purpose of the surgical quality dashboard is to
guide practitioners as they strive to improve the experience
of their patients. The principles described above provide the
framework for the organization of the dashboard, but without
actual data, the dashboard may not be helpful. The more
advanced displays will be customizable to include metrics
that the user selects individually. Additionally, another key
concept is to identify who should access the dashboard. All
    Chapter 3. Creating a Surgical Dashboard for Quality       45

key stakeholders? Selected stakeholders? None of the clini-
cal providers? Should it be available to the public? The fol-
lowing measures will vary in utility based on practice setting
but should be included on the dashboard display:


Productivity

A summary of patient care within a given time period should
be among the first data points displayed on the surgical qual-
ity dashboard. This should include operative cases performed
as well as patients seen in clinic. It may be helpful to separate
operative cases into those requiring postoperative hospital
admission and those performed as outpatient procedures.
Certain providers may find a cumulative report of their rela-
tive value units (RVUs) to be of value. Efficiency metrics
such as average length of stay or third next available open
clinic appointment could be represented here.


Mortality
Patient mortality should be front and center on the surgical
quality dashboard. Surgical mortality is generally considered
to be any patient death that occurs between the time of sur-
gery and postoperative day 30. These data are easy to collect
from hospital administrative records and are generally very
accurate. In addition, national mortality rates are readily
available for many different procedures, and so comparison
to the national standard is simple. Including these metrics on
the dashboard allows for surgeons to see where they excel
and where they might need to focus attention in relation to
their peers. The mortality rate should be risk adjusted, as ter-
tiary care centers are more likely to care for sicker patients
with increased comorbid conditions. This can drive the mor-
tality rate up but is not necessarily purely a reflection of the
surgeon’s care and subsequently should not serve as a poten-
tial barrier for these patients to be able to find access to care.
46     S. M. Miller and J. M. Morton

Postoperative Outcomes

Postoperative complications are to be included on all surgical
dashboards. Compiling these data is often more complicated
than mortality, as there is more room for ambiguity in the way
these events are recorded. Patient safety indicators (PSI)
were created by the Agency for Healthcare Research and
Quality (AHRQ) to establish a standard for reporting these
postoperative complications (Fig. 3.1) (see Chap. 25 for a
more expansive discussion on PSIs). This classification system
allows for comparison between practitioners at different
institutions and across the nation. These data serve as mark-
ers of surgical quality, and poor results are meant to trigger
focused investigation.
   This display should be customizable by the individual
user. Depending on a surgeon’s specialty, certain metrics may
be more relevant. For example, vascular surgeons may
choose to view rates of postoperative acute kidney injury as
this can provide feedback on different patients’ abilities to
metabolize intravenous contrast. Of particular interest to

PATIENT SAFETY INDICATOR
PSI 02 Death Rate in Low-Mortality Diagnosis Related Groups (DRGs)
PSI 03 Pressure Ulcer Rate
PSI 04 Death Rate among Surgical Inpatients with Serious Treatable Complications
PSI 05 Retained Surgical Item or Unretrieved Device Fragment Count
PSI 06 Iatrogenic Pneumothorax Rate
PSI 07 Central Venous Catheter-Related Blood Stream Infection Rate
PSI 08 In Hospital Fall with Hip Fracture Rate
PSI 09 Perioperative Hemorrhage or Hematoma Rate
PSI 10 Postoperative Acute Kidney Injury Requiring Dialysis
PSI 11 Postoperative Respiratory Failure Rate
PSI 12 Perioperative Pulmonary Embolism or Deep Vein Thrombosis Rate
PSI 13 Postoperative Sepsis Rate
PSI 14 Postoperative Wound Dehiscence Rate
PSI 15 Abdominopelvic Accidental Puncture or Laceration Rate
PSI 17 Birth Trauma Rate-Injury to Neonate
PSI 18 Obstetric Trauma Rate-Vaginal DeliveryWith Instrument
PSI 19 Obstetric Trauma Rate-Vaginal Delivery Without Instrument

Figure 3.1 Patient safety indicators published by AHRQ in 2020
    Chapter 3. Creating a Surgical Dashboard for Quality      47

bariatric surgeons might be a report of their patients’ post-
operative weight loss. A general surgeon may want to see a
record of hernia recurrences or a breakdown of laparoscopic,
robotic, and open procedures.


Hospital Admissions Data

Hospital admissions data are a vital source of information for
the surgical quality dashboard. Hospital length of stay (LOS)
and discharge disposition offer insight into the immediate
postoperative course of patients who are admitted to the
hospital. Extended lengths of stay and unexpected discharges
to skilled nursing or rehabilitation facilities are often indica-
tors of postoperative complications. In addition, emergency
department (ED) visits and readmission rates are valuable to
include. Surgeons may not hear if their patients present to the
ED or require admission to a nonsurgical service, and so the
surgical dashboard may be the only way for them to receive
this feedback.


National Standards and NSQIP

The American College of Surgeons put forth the National
Surgical Quality Improvement Program (NSQIP) to improve
the quality of surgical care through the accurate and detailed
collection of outcomes data. Participating sites employ a
Surgical Clinical Reviewer to collect preoperative, intraop-
erative, and postoperative data on randomly selected patients.
These data are collected from medical records and include all
complications within the 30 days after surgery, regardless of
whether these complications take place in the inpatient or
outpatient setting. At present, there are over 700 participat-
ing hospitals across the world, including 49 of 50 states and 11
countries [2]. This methodology has allowed for more com-
plete and accurate records and for the establishment of a
national and international baseline for a variety of periopera-
48    S. M. Miller and J. M. Morton

tive metrics. The NSQIP provides a semiannual report which
is broken down by specialty and delivers performance data
compared to de-identified peer institutions in a dashboard
format. Institutions are ranked by deciles or quartiles, which
allows for identification of areas for improvement, which can
then internally drive quality improvement projects.


Connecting to Quality Improvement
The surgical quality dashboard, above all, is an instrument to
inspire improvement in the quality of care that surgeons
deliver to their patients. It allows for both the identification
of areas where focused attention is needed and the ability to
track change and quantify improvement. However, the dash-
board does not provide a course of action by which quality
can be improved. There are a number of national organiza-
tions that have formed to fill this need to guide hospitals and
clinicians through the process of quality improvement.


SCIP
The Surgical Care Improvement Project (SCIP) was created
to provide a framework for surgeons to improve the quality
of care they offer to their patients. They believe that a
“meaningful reduction in complications requires that sur-
geons, anesthesiologists, perioperative nurses, pharmacists,
infection control professionals and hospital executives work
together to make surgical care improvement a priority” [3].
By concentrating on complications that are both frequent
and expensive, they hope to reduce surgical complications
by 25% while also limiting the extraneous costs that these
adverse events incur. These parameters have produced a
focus on surgical site infections, venous thromboembolism,
and adverse cardiac events by monitoring the measures
listed in Fig. 3.2.
      Chapter 3. Creating a Surgical Dashboard for Quality                                                         49

Set Measures
  Set Measure ID                                            Measure Short Name
SCIP-Card-2         Surgey Patients on Beta-Blocker Therapy Prior to Admission Who Received a Beta-Blocker During the
                    Perioperative Period
SCIP-Inf-1          Prophylactic Antibiotic Received Within One Hour Prior to Surgical Incision
SCIP-Inf-2          Prophylactic Antibiotic Selection for Surgical Patients
SCIP-Inf-3          Prophylactic Antibiotics Discontinued Within 24 Hours After Surgery End Time
SCIP-Inf-4          Cardiac Surgery Patients with Controlled 6 A.M. Postoperative Blood Glucose
SCIP-Inf-6          Surgery Patients with Appropriate Hair Removal
SCIP-Inf-7          Colorectal Surgery Patients with Immediate Postoperative Normothermia
SCIP-venous-        Surgery Patients with Recommended Venous Thromboembolism Prophylaxis Ordered
thromboembolism-1
SCIP-venous-        Surgery Patients Who Received Appropriate Venous Thromboembolism Prophylaxis Within 24 Hours
thromboembolism-2   Prior to Surgery to 24 Hours After Surgery



Figure 3.2 Metrics collected by SCIP

 HRQ Safety Program for Improving Surgical
A
Care and Recovery
The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality created the
Safety Program for Improving Surgical Care and Recovery to
improve the quality of surgical care. Their stated aim is to
“help hospitals and clinicians use AHRQ’s Comprehensive
Unit-based Safety Program (CUSP) method to enhance the
surgical process and improve patients’ recovery after s­ urgery”
[4]. Specifically, their focus is on decreasing infections and all
postoperative complications as well as length of inpatient
hospital stays and unexpected postoperative hospital visits.
This is accomplished by empowering leaders in all disciplines
of healthcare workers to promote a culture of safety and
teamwork among each of the members of the surgical team.
At present, they are refining their program with the hopes of
opening enrollment to additional hospitals in the next several
years.


Empowering the Surgical Team

As we work toward improving the quality of care we offer
our patients, the importance of cohesion within surgical
teams has become evident. At each step of the surgical pro-
cess, from preoperative evaluation through the operating
50    S. M. Miller and J. M. Morton

room and into postoperative recovery, there are groups of
people from a multitude of backgrounds working together to
help patients regain their quality of life. The surgical quality
dashboard should include metrics related to communication
between these team members. Records of multidisciplinary
rounds, unnecessary or repeated blood draws, and instances
of waking patients can all inform surgical teams of areas
where they are excelling and also of those where improve-
ment might be needed.
   The surgical quality dashboard can also directly facilitate
communication. In certain cases, these team members may
not ever work together in the same space, and so opportuni-
ties for discussion and feedback do not occur naturally. For
example, if a physical therapist notices that several patients
have peroneal neuropathy after a procedure where their legs
were placed in stirrups, this is important feedback for a sur-
geon to receive so that a simple adjustment in positioning can
be made. In addition, there are times when a particular team
member may feel more comfortable offering anonymous
feedback. The dashboard can serve this purpose as well.
While this information may not be displayed in the most
prominent position, its inclusion is important.


Future Directions

The surgical quality dashboard has evolved significantly in
the last decade. As our ability to track both individual and
national data has improved, so too has our ability to identify
and address areas in need of attention. As we continue to
move forward, there are ways that our surgical quality dash-
boards can expand. The future may include data from the
operating room not previously available such as an “OR
Black Box.” Data related to prescription filling and monitor-
ing will need to be included, specifically those related to
narcotics. In the context of the ongoing opioid crisis, having
real-time information about narcotic usage can help a sur-
geon to adjust prescribing practices to reflect the needs of the
    Chapter 3. Creating a Surgical Dashboard for Quality        51

average patient, as has already been done in some states. If a
surgeon typically prescribes 20 tablets of 5 mg oxycodone
after a laparoscopic cholecystectomy and finds that only 40%
of patients fill that prescription, he or she may decide to
decrease the number of tablets she is prescribing. In addition,
it may be helpful for the surgical quality dashboard to include
links to evidence-based methods that have been shown to
improve certain aspects of surgical care. For example, if a
particular surgeon has a high rate of postoperative venous
thromboembolism (VTE), links to guidelines for postopera-
tive VTE prophylaxis should be displayed in the same
window.


Conclusion
The surgical quality dashboard has never been more impor-
tant than it is in today’s world. With real-time and interna-
tional data more accessible than ever before, the opportunity
for quality improvement has never been greater. By
­integrating data from sources such as NSQIP and AHRQ,
 surgeons can see how they compare to their peers and also
 how their practice has changed over time. By streamlining the
 presentation of relevant data in a simple format, adjustments
 can be made that decrease complications, save healthcare
 dollars, and, most importantly, save patient lives.


References
1. Scott J, et al. Use of national burden to define operative emer-
   gency general surgery. JAMA Surg. 2016;151(6):e160480.
2. https://www.facs.org/quality-­programs/acs-­nsqip/about/history.
3. Griffin F. Reducing surgical complications. Jt Comm J Qual
   Patient Saf. 2007;33(11):660–5.
4. https://www.ahrq.gov/hai/tools/enhanced-­recovery/index.html.
Chapter 4
Understanding Complex
Systems and How It
Impacts Quality
in Surgery
Buğra Tugertimur and Bruce Ramshaw


Introduction
In 1944, President Roosevelt sent a letter to Vannevar Bush,
the director of the Office of Scientific Research and
Development, to propose a plan for applying similar research
principles used in the recent war (WWII) to the war on
­disease. The Bush report, Science, The Endless Frontier: A
 Report to the President, led to the development of the
 National Science Foundation (NSF) and then the National
 Institute of Health (NIH). The applied model is termed the
 “linear model of innovation” using tools from reductionist
 science, like controlled research trials.
    In healthcare, controlled studies attempt to determine if a
 treatment is safe and effective and generates recommenda-


B. Tugertimur
General Surgery Resident, PGY 5, Department of Surgery, Lenox
Hill Hospital, Northwell Health, New York City, NY, USA
e-mail: btugertimu@northwell.edu
B. Ramshaw (*)
Managing Partner, CQInsights PBC, Knoxville, TN, USA

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature   53
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_4
54    B. Tugertimur and B. Ramshaw

tions for the average patient. This one-size-fits-all approach is
not ideal for complex biologic systems. With an appropriate
data and analytics infrastructure in healthcare based on the
principles of systems science, we could identify different
patient subpopulations and apply the optimal variety of treat-
ments based on which treatment had the best value for each
subpopulation. This is the type of data and analytics infra-
structure Netflix uses to present the optimal array of movies
and shows to customer viewer subpopulations, for example.
   Because we don’t have this type of data and analytics infra-
structure in healthcare, we have had to suffer the conse-
quences of using management strategies during the COVID-­19
pandemic, such as social distancing and quarantines, similar to
what we did nearly 400 years ago during the plague. On May
12, 2020, during a senate hearing about the lessons learned
from our response to COVID-19, Senator Mitt Romney asked
Dr. Robert Redfield, the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) director, “How is it possible in this day and
age that the CDC has never established a real-­time system
with accurate data?” Dr. Redfield responded, “The reality is
there is an archaic system… This nation needs a modern,
highly capable data analytic system that can do predictive
analysis. I think it’s one of the many shortcomings that have
been identified as we went through this outbreak, and I
couldn’t agree with you more, it’s time to get that corrected.”
   Our sense of discovery is an innate compelling drive that
has advanced us as a species since the beginning of human
existence. According to some philosophers and scientists
alike, our constant search for who we are, where we come
from, and where we are going is what defines humanity and
perhaps even gives meaning and reason to life. While ever so
brief in the grand scheme of the universe and Earth, the eras
of human evolution have been propelled through history by
the nature of our scientific, artistic, literary, and philosophical
curiosity. Among these, in science, the concept of reduction-
ism has been central to developing the scientific method lead-
ing to innovation and societal advancement for our world.
   While reductionism has existed for centuries, it became
particularly important in facilitating the Industrial Revolution.
  Chapter 4.   Understanding Complex Systems and How...      55

Descartes described reductionism’s basic tenant in the seven-
teenth century: “divide each difficulty into as many parts as is
feasible and necessary to resolve it.” Reductionism involves
reducing an object, system, or process into its comprehensible
components to understand the broader phenomenon, there-
fore assuming that a complex system is equivalent to the sum
of its parts [1]. Applied to science, this method of experimen-
tation and research means that all biological phenomena can
be understood by unraveling their fundamental biochemical,
molecular, and environmental components [2].


Flaws of Reductionism
In modern clinical medicine, the reductionist learning tool is
best exemplified by the prospective, randomized, controlled
trial (PRCT). While this has been the gold standard in
research for testing hypotheses, new medications, and novel
medical devices, one fundamental flaw is the attempt to con-
trol all variables. In addition to the fact that all variables
could never be truly controlled, a change in any one variable
in the real world can potentially lead to a different, unin-
tended outcome despite the same intervention.
   Another flaw of reductionism, including the PRCT or any
algorithm generated from centralized data, is the assumption
of generalizability. The concept of generalizability leads to
harm in some subpopulations and waste in others in addition
to the intended benefit in yet other subpopulations. There are
no one-size-fits-all solutions in the real world. For example, a
recent analysis of a population health algorithm used by
many hospitals in the United States revealed significant harm
had occurred to marginalized subpopulations, particularly
African-American minorities [3].
   In a world with biologic variability that is continuously
changing, another flaw of reductionism is the assumption that
nothing changes. Static protocols that result in treatment
guidelines are not generalizable to all patients, and they are
not designed for continuous improvement as things change.
Without accumulating new data and interpreting further
56    B. Tugertimur and B. Ramshaw

analyses through feedback loops, any static treatment guide-
line or static algorithm will degrade over time and lead to
more waste and unintentional harm.
   The applicability of reductionist PRCTs is also limited by
attempting to determine the statistical significance of isolated
factors, assuming causation, instead of generating weighted
correlations for all identified factors and factor combinations
to assess their impact on outcomes. The use of linear statisti-
cal methods to prove statistical significance between a vari-
able and outcome measure is not how these statistical tools
were intended to be used.The American Statistical Association
published a statement in 2016 about this widespread misuse
of statistics in science [4].


Our Current Scientific Paradigm Shift
In contrast to Descartes, Aristotle is credited for his observa-
tion that “the whole is more than the sum of its parts,” which is
a central tenant of systems science. Our world is going through
the first major scientific paradigm shift since the Renaissance,
when the concepts of reductionism were developed. At that
time (around A.D. 1300–1600), and for our world over the next
few hundred years, this was a significant advancement. We
learned how to use raw materials and make useful products.
We learned to harness energy and apply it in ways that led to
improved quality of life for many people. But there is a grow-
ing realization that we’re approaching the law of diminishing
returns for our reductionist science paradigm. We are expend-
ing tremendous resources and working harder yet achieving
less improvement in our health and quality of life.
   Thomas Kuhn coined the term “paradigm shift” in his
book The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, published in
1962. He described the process of scientific evolution. He
explained that this is not a linear process as previously
thought where we would just continue to gain knowledge and
improve as a society. According to Kuhn, the impetus for a
shift in a paradigm occurs when there are enough anomalies
(things that just don’t make sense according to the rules of
  Chapter 4.       Understanding Complex Systems and How...                             57

the current paradigm) for people to realize that the solution
isn’t to figure out why the anomalies are occurring, rather it’s
to figure out a new paradigm that better aligns with what is
happening in the world. The anomalies are only anomalies
because the current scientific rules can’t account for what is
being observed. Figure 4.1 describes some of the differences
between the reductionist science paradigm and the systems
science paradigm.

                           Reductionist Science                Systems Science

                             Magic Pill/Quick Fix             Emergence/Network
     Metaphors

                                   Machine                  Complex adaptive system

                                    Linear                         Non-linear
    Characteristics

                                 Predictable                      Probabilistic

                                  Normalcy                        Robustness

                                Risk reduction                Adaptation/Plasticity

                                Homeostasis                     Homeodynamics

                           Do things just to be safe     Do things to learn and improve

                        Can control our biologic world   Can manage our biologic world
      Principles

                                 Lower Brain                      Higher Brain

                                Fragmentation                        Holism

                                   Certainty                      Uncertainty

                                   Secrecy                       Transparency

                                 Competition                     Collaboration

                        Blame is common after error              Blame is rare

                         Didactic Learning (one right    Ensemble Learning (continuous
                                   answer)                       improvement)

                           Authoritative Leadership           Empathic Leadership

                       Focus on parts of the system or   Focus on the whole system or
                               process/”Silos”                      process

                               Centralized data               De-centralized data

                             Need control groups              Control is an illusion



Figure 4.1 Reductionist science paradigm vs. systems science
paradigm
58    B. Tugertimur and B. Ramshaw

 he Science of Complex Systems Applied
T
to Healthcare
In contrast to reductionism, systems science is rooted in the
concepts of measurement and improvement. Regular feed-
back loops are performed based on insight gained from a
variety of data analytics and visualization tools. Instead of
providing a “best practice” guideline with a one-size-fits-all
approach, systems science has the potential to provide an
optimal variety of preventative and treatment options for
each appropriate patient subpopulation.
   The systems science paradigm accommodates constant
change and uncontrollable biologic variability. Instead of one
static hypothesis, there are feedback loops that provide
insight to inform clinical teams, including patients, so that
process and outcome measurements are improved, and mea-
sured outcomes are also improved over time.


 eal-World Examples of Reductionism
R
Compared with Systems Science
Vitamin Supplements

In 1977, George L. Engel, MD of the University of Rochester,
formulated the biopsychosocial model (BPSM), which
described a holistic approach in patient care. His philosophy,
which was in stark distinction to reductionism, proposed that
the physiology of an illness is inseparable from its psycho-
logical, behavioral, and social impacts and that the reciprocal
influences of all these elements must be considered in under-
standing and treating disease. His principle was considered
an evolution for medical thinking and was adopted in 2002
as the foundation of the World Health Organization’s
International Classification of Function (WHO ICF).
   Compared with this holistic approach to health, an exam-
ple of a reductionist approach is exemplified by the supple-
  Chapter 4.   Understanding Complex Systems and How...     59

mental vitamin craze in the 1990s. Nobel Prize recipient
Linus Pauling is considered the father of molecular biology.
In 1970, he published a best-seller book called Vitamin C
and the Common Cold, which asserted that high doses of
daily ascorbic acid could eventually eradicate the cold and
many other diseases, including cancer. Despite refutes of his
claims by scientists and clinicians, the concepts in his book
were embraced by popular culture and promoted in a 1992
article and on the cover of Time magazine that claimed vita-
mins could “fight cancer, heart disease and ravages of
aging.”
   The basis of Pauling’s belief was that antioxidants found
in vitamins could prevent damage by neutralizing free radi-
cals, which are linked to aging, heart disease, and dementia.
While fruits and vegetables are touted for their antitumori-
genic benefits based on antioxidants, later research showed
that only the balance of numerous antioxidants found natu-
rally within them provides this benefit by creating a protec-
tive buffer against free radicals [5]. Not only does this
protective effect disappear when antioxidants are consumed
in isolation, such as in vitamin supplements, but worse, they
are ­potentially toxic secondary to their pro-oxidative effect
through suppression of the body’s antioxidant defense sys-
tem [6]. Recent articles have described the needed paradigm
shift from reductionist to systems science in health and nutri-
tion [7, 8].


Football Injuries

To demonstrate another comparison of the reductionist sci-
ence paradigm and the systems science paradigm, each para-
digm’s research tools could be applied to the problem of
National Football League (NFL) injuries.
   Using the reductionist paradigm, a hypothesis would be
defined based on observations of the problem and knowledge
of potential solutions. A primary investigator might identify a
newly available helmet technology that potentially provides
more stable cushioning. A study could be designed to prove
60    B. Tugertimur and B. Ramshaw

or disprove the hypothesis that the new helmet technology
would reduce the incidence and severity of concussions.
   Because this study method requires human subjects
research protection, it must be submitted for review and
approval to an institutional review board (IRB). There would
also need to be research agreements executed for all NFL
teams and consent from all the players. This will take at least
one entire season to complete, and so the study would not
begin until the next NFL season.
   Before this second season, the teams would be randomized
so that half would use the standard helmets and half would
use the new helmet technology. The data would be collected,
and the results at the end of the season might show that the
new helmet technology has led to a one-third decrease in the
incidence and severity of concussions. However, by this time,
almost 2 years after the study was designed, there might be
other new helmet technologies available, and there is no way
to know if they are better than the helmet technology tested
in this study.
   On the other hand, applying tools from systems science
would not attempt to prove anything – there would be no
hypothesis. The goal would be to measure and improve out-
comes by identifying and measuring factors that might impact
those outcomes. Then, by gaining insight through the use of
various analytical tools, attempts could be made to improve
the outcomes measured, in this case, all types of injuries.
   Because there is no attempt to randomize teams or control
variables, there is no requirement for an IRB submission. To
determine what data should be collected from observing the
games, a small team with diverse expertise and perspectives
would be assembled. They would propose how best to mea-
sure the incidence and severity of all injuries, and all factors
the group thinks are potentially significant and may contrib-
ute to the incidence and severity of injuries. The group might
suggest measuring the preseason training regimens, the
weather during each game, the altitude of the stadium, the
type of helmet used by each team, the quarter in which the
injury occurred, the position of the injured player, etc.
  Chapter 4.   Understanding Complex Systems and How...      61

    At the end of the season, an analysis would be performed
that generates weighted correlations to determine which fac-
tors and combinations of factors are most highly correlated
with injuries. Based on this insight, highly correlated factors
(potentially modifiable) could be addressed. Changes could
be implemented that would likely lessen the incidence and
severity of injuries in the next season.
    For example, the analysis might reveal that three factors
were highly correlated with an increase in the incidence and
severity of injuries – high and low extremes of temperature
and artificial turf. With that knowledge, the artificial turf
could be replaced, and heating and cooling technologies
could be developed to be used in the next season. Data would
then be collected to measure the impact of these improve-
ment attempts. The analysis of this data might demonstrate a
decrease in the incidence and severity of all types of injuries.
    This is a simplistic example of the potential application of
systems science to improve the health of a subpopulation of
people (NFL players). These results were obtained by the
senior author (BR) when he did a 7th-grade science fair
­project by watching and recording data for all televised NFL
 games in 1975. Over the next 25 years, the NFL did replace
 artificial turf and developed heating and cooling technologies
 for games played in extreme temperatures.
    The full application of systems science, including nonlinear
 analytics, would allow for feedback loops during each season
 so any high-signal factors could be discovered well before the
 end of the season. Also, the analysis of different subpopula-
 tions (like linemen vs. quarterbacks) could generate various
 ideas for improvement based on those unique, position-­
 specific subpopulations.
    Which scientific paradigm results in more knowledge
 faster and is less costly to apply? What if healthcare applied
 systems science tools to all patients with all types of diseases
 to measure and improve the value of care provided in our
 global healthcare system? How quickly could we achieve a
 sustainable system where costs are lowered, and outcomes
 are improved over time?
62    B. Tugertimur and B. Ramshaw

Hernia Mesh

In a reductionist science paradigm, hernia mesh would be
inert in the body or at least have the same biologic interac-
tion (generalizability) for all patients. The interaction between
hernia mesh and the human body was the first complex prob-
lem the senior author (BR) investigated that led to learning
the principles of systems science.
   Working with two engineers, a materials characterization
lab was developed at the University of Missouri-Columbia to
analyze mesh after removing it from patients (usually for
symptoms of chronic pain, infection, and/or a recurrent her-
nia). The material removed from the body often looked dif-
ferent and was sometimes harder and more brittle than the
soft and flexible material that comes out of the package. But
this type of physical change didn’t occur in all mesh explants,
and it occurred to different degrees in different patients – it
could even be different in other parts of the same mesh.
   Although these changes that occur in the mesh after
implantation in patients have not been correlated with
patient outcomes, they demonstrated a large degree of vari-
ability from patient to patient. In mesh hernia repairs, we also
see variability in patient outcomes. For most patients who
have a hernia repaired with mesh, the mesh performs well,
and the patient has a good outcome. But in some patients, the
mesh may be a contributing factor that leads to an uninten-
tional complication such as chronic pain or a recurrent
hernia.
   In a systems science paradigm (our real biologic world),
the same hernia mesh, placed with the same technique, may
result in different outcomes for different patient subpopula-
tions. Figure 4.2 illustrates the systems science concept that
different sets of factors for patients who undergo the same
treatment, hernia repair with mesh in this example, will result
in a subpopulation of patients with good outcomes (benefit),
another subpopulation that does not benefit from the proce-
dure, but suffers no harm (waste), and another subpopulation
that is harmed unintentionally from the treatment (harm).
  Chapter 4.   Understanding Complex Systems and How...       63

 linical Quality Improvement: A Systems
C
Science Tool
To develop a sustainable healthcare system, we will need to
learn how to better measure the value of care provided in the
context of the whole, definable patient care processes. The
principles of systems science propose that value-based con-
tinuous quality improvement (CQI) tools can be applied to
lower costs and improve outcomes simultaneously. CQI ini-
tiatives can potentially be focused on improving the value of
patient care in the actual clinical environment. Using CQI
principles is often more appropriate for developing an under-
standing of the factors that drive improvements in patient
care than randomized controlled trials that aim to prove or
disprove a hypothesis [9, 10].
    Rather than trying to prove or disprove a hypothesis,
value-based CQI is implemented to measure and improve the
value for each patient care process in which these principles
are applied [11]. Unlike traditional clinical research, CQI is
not restricted only to patients with specific clinical character-
istics defined by study inclusion and exclusion criteria.
Instead, CQI allows for more flexible decisions based on situ-
ations that healthcare providers face in their everyday prac-
tice. CQI can track many outcome measures over the entire
patient care cycle over time, not just during a predefined
study period.
    Lawmakers have recognized the value of CQI initiatives
for improving patient care. For example, the use of CQI,
defined as a part of healthcare operations, has been one of
the exemptions from the HIPAA law since it was imple-
mented in 1996. Also, the US Department of Health and
Human Services recognizes that there is a distinction between
most quality improvement efforts and research involving
human subjects that requires IRB approval. CQI focuses on
local process improvement and real-world clinical data and
analytics interpreted by the care team. These CQI efforts
applied by a clinical team and secondary data uses, such as for
64   B. Tugertimur and B. Ramshaw

       Patient and Treatment Factors    Intervention/Treatment     Outcomes



                                                                    Benefit



                                          Hernia repair with        Waste
                                                mesh

                                                                  Unintended
                                                                    Harm
                              Any treatment results in potential benefit,
                                     unintended harm or waste

       Patient and Treatment Factors    Intervention/Treatment     Outcomes



                                                                   Benefit



                                          Hernia repair with
                                                mesh




                                Factors highly correlated with benefit


       Patient and Treatment Factors    Intervention/Treatment     Outcomes




                                          Hernia repair with        Waste
                                                mesh




                                Factors highly correlated with Waste


       Patient and Treatment Factors    Intervention/Treatment     Outcomes




                                          Hernia repair with
                                                mesh

                                                                  Unintended
                                                                    Harm
                                 Factors highly correlated with
                                       unintended harm
  Chapter 4.   Understanding Complex Systems and How...            65

Figure 4.2 Illustrations demonstrating the potential outcomes of a
treatment, hernia repair with mesh. The outcome that occurs is
determined by the state of multiple factors present at the time of the
treatment intervention. With the appropriate use of tools from sys-
tems science, algorithms can be developed to predict what outcome
is most likely to occur and what treatment option may result in the
best value-based outcome for any patient or patient subpopulation



academic presentation and publication, do not require sub-
mission to an IRB [12].


Analyzing Data

Systems science tools for analyzing data include a variety of
data analytics and data visualization methods. Although lin-
ear statistics are commonly used in healthcare, various
­nonlinear analytical tools may be more appropriate when
 analyzing real-world healthcare data. One group of tools are
 called principal component analysis (PCA) and factor analy-
 sis (FA). Analyses using these tools produce weighted corre-
 lations between the factors and combinations of factors with
 measured outcomes and outcome variations. These weighted
 correlations can be used to develop predictive algorithms.
    There are also many tools and ways to visualize data. The
 different ways to visualize data depend on the different types
 of data (discreet, continuous, lists, unstructured, etc.). Data
 visualizations can help a clinical team drill down into the data
 to help gain insights that may complement the interpretation
 of other types of data analyses. Often in healthcare, data is
 visualized in a static data dashboard where the same data is
 presented month after month. This minimizes the value of
 data. Data visualization tools should be interactive and
 adaptable as each clinical team gains new insights and applies
 those insights for new ways to visualize and measure their
 data.
66    B. Tugertimur and B. Ramshaw

   There is no one right way to analyze or visualize data. A
clinical team should explore different ways to analyze and
visualize a dataset. As clinical teams learn to do this over
time, through multiple feedback loops, new insights will be
discovered and applied for improvement in measurements
and improvement in outcomes. Datasets should be updated
with new data that is analyzed and visualized again after new
measurements and process improvements are implemented.


The Problem of Suboptimization

Electronic medical records (EMR) systems are designed to
document patient care fragments for coding and billing
instead of being designed for a whole, definable patient care
process. Because of this fragmentation, the opportunity for
data collection throughout the entire patient process is lost. A
systems science approach would instead provide data collec-
tion throughout the whole cycle of care that can be analyzed
to measure and improve the outcomes for any definable,
whole patient care process.
   This care fragmentation leads to the inappropriate appli-
cation of process improvement tools such as CQI principles
(such as Lean and Six Sigma). When improvement tools are
applied to a fragment of care (a subprocess) rather than in
the context of a whole, definable patient care process, the
effort may improve the subprocess, but this will not result in
improved outcomes for the whole patient process. The term
for optimization of a subprocess without measuring the
impact on the entire process is called suboptimization.
   Most of the “quality” measures that hospitals are required
to report (which might impact their financial reimbursement)
are examples of suboptimization: central line infection rate,
urinary catheter infection rate, 30-day rehospitalization rate,
etc. To make the situation worse, the data from many differ-
ent types of patient care processes (different contexts) is
lumped together at the hospital level, so the data is just
  Chapter 4.   Understanding Complex Systems and How...        67

noise – it can’t be reliably analyzed because of the lack of a
definable context.
   For example, there are many published reports of process
improvement efforts that can result in central line infection
rates approaching or even achieving zero infections – which
sounds wonderful. But this is not a good outcome if it is iso-
lated to only the subprocess without a measurement of the
impact on the outcomes for each whole, definable patient
care process. If it’s not measured, one can’t know the out-
comes for each type of patient process in that group of
patients who received a central line. One can’t know if some
patients didn’t need a central line. It would be unknown if
some patients suffer from other types of complications
related to central lines – pneumothorax, bleeding, thrombo-
embolism, etc. Some of these other complications may be
more harmful than an infection. By only looking at central
line infection, other unintended consequences will occur and
might not be identified – a consequence of suboptimization.
   Another example of suboptimization is the recent hospital
focus on the problem of sepsis. Sepsis, as a diagnosis alone,
provides no context. Is it an 80-year-old nursing home patient
with sepsis from a urinary tract infection, or is it a 20-year-old
motorcycle trauma patient with an open pelvic fracture that
has developed sepsis from a necrotizing wound infection?
These are two very different patient processes. Developing a
treatment for a subprocess like sepsis that is a one-size-fits-all
solution can lead to variable outcomes and unintended waste
and harm, especially when the outcome of the whole process
is not measured. This is what has happened with the effort to
implement hospital protocols to treat patients with sepsis.
Although these sepsis bundles have led to a decreased short-­
term (in-hospital) death rate, the unintended long-term harm
includes high rates of weakness, cognitive impairment, hospi-
tal readmissions, and late death [13].
68    B. Tugertimur and B. Ramshaw

 ystems Science Applied to Healthcare:
S
Implementing a Learning Health System
Noise – Wisdom Continuum
  Data (alone) = Noise
  Data + Context = Information
  Experimentation + Error = Experience
  Information + Experience = Knowledge
  Knowledge + Humility = Wisdom
  – Fergus Connolly
  Noise – Wisdom: The Simplest Note You Need
  fergusconnolly.com April 5, 2019


 ystems Science Steps to Implement a Learning
S
Health System
The principles of systems science propose that a learning
system in each local clinical environment will be necessary
for a sustainable healthcare system. Each local learning sys-
tem’s goal should be to measure and improve the value of
care provided in the context of each whole, definable patient
care process. The steps to apply a systems science approach
include:
1. Context: define each whole patient care process. For data to
   have value, one of the basic rules in systems science applied
   in a complex system is that data requires “context.” That
   means that the data is generated from a definable, whole
   process. In healthcare, an example of data not in context is
   when a surgeon is given their “quality” dashboard. The
   dashboard typically shows the rate of postsurgical wound
   infections, for example. But that outcome measure is for all
   patients that had an operation by that specific surgeon. If
   the surgeon is a general surgeon, that wound infection rate
   might include patients who had breast procedures, colon
   resections, hernia repairs, and maybe even operations for
   gunshot wounds. Combining an outcome measure from all
     Chapter 4.   Understanding Complex Systems and How...     69

     these different contexts makes the data confusing, nearly
     worthless, and may lead to inappropriate interpretations
     and responses.
2.   Diverse teams: define the small teams with diverse perspec-
     tives who are most involved in caring for the patients in
     each whole, definable patient process. Over the past few
     decades, the science of teams has demonstrated how
     important it is to work in small, diverse teams to optimally
     manage and improve the outcomes for any complex pro-
     cess. In systems science, it’s well known that a small team
     made up of diverse perspectives focused on any complex
     problem or process is critical to achieving the best insight
     and outcomes.
3.   Measure “what matters”: we collect too much data in
     healthcare. Most of what we collect for any patient process
     is just noise and has little or no impact on outcomes that
     matter the most. A small, diverse team can best identify the
     patient factors, treatment factors, and outcome measures
     that matter the most in the context of each whole, defin-
     able patient care process.
4.   Value (the most important outcome to measure): a basic
     principle in business and systems science is that you can’t
     improve an outcome if you don’t measure it. On the other
     hand, if you measure something and apply the tools of sys-
     tems science appropriately, you can improve it. We don’t
     measure the value of care for any whole, definable patient
     process in healthcare, so we can’t lower costs and improve
     outcomes. This has led to an unsustainable healthcare sys-
     tem globally.
5.   Decentralize the data: Hospitals, academic medical centers,
     and large physician practices have centralized data into
     fragmented silos (EMRs). The current strategy is to cen-
     tralize the data even more into data lakes or data ware-
     houses, although centralized data limits the ability to learn
     from it. Centralized data can generate averages but not
     insights. Averages lead to one-size-fits-all approaches, but
     individual patients are not well represented by an average.
     Insights gained to improving patient outcomes while low-
70    B. Tugertimur and B. Ramshaw

   ering cost, maintaining privacy, and maximizing security
   are only possible through a decentralized data
   infrastructure.
6. Analyze the data using a human-computing symbiosis: a
   human-computing symbiosis combines the intuition, cre-
   ativity, and empathy of human team members with com-
   puting capabilities to provide various data analysis and
   visualization outputs. These different strengths are comple-
   mentary. Figure 4.3 illustrates how the human team can
   determine what data is most appropriate to program into
   the computer. The computer provides analyses and data
   visualizations. The human team will then interpret the
   analyses and use insights gained to improve measurements
   and implement process improvements to improve
   outcomes.
7. Feedback loops: one of the essential concepts in systems
   science is the concept of feedback loops. After data is col-
   lected and analyzed, the team interprets the data and gen-
   erates ideas for improvement. Over time and with the
   collection of new data, the analysis is done again. Each
   time the team reviews an analysis of data, they examine the
   impact of previous process improvement attempts and
   gain new insights for improvement. The team can use
   ­various ways to look at the data and bring in perspectives
    from outside of the core team to gain insight from new per-
    spectives. For example, obtaining feedback from patients
    and family members can generate new ideas because of
    their unique perspective. Another example would be to
    include an anesthesiologist and a pain specialist in a CQI
    meeting when considering the implementation of new
    multimodal surgical pain management strategies to
    decrease the use of opioids for postoperative pain.
8. Ensemble model for learning: applying these systems sci-
    ence concepts in each local clinical environment alone is
    not adequate for a sustainable healthcare system. Each
    local team will need to develop a learning network to share
    knowledge and algorithms with other local clinical teams.
    This networked learning infrastructure will enable ongoing
    improvement of value. If we don’t collaborate to solve
  Chapter 4.   Understanding Complex Systems and How...         71




                            Data in Context
Human                      Programed into the
 Team                          computer




                                                      Multiple
                 Analytics and
                                                      Computer
                 Visualization
                                                      Applications




Human                       Interpretation &
 Team                          Application




Figure 4.3 Human-computer symbiosis applied to healthcare. Small
teams made up of people with diverse perspectives relative to each
patient process determine what patient and treatment factors are
most important to collect and what outcomes measure value in the
context of each whole, definable patient care process. Computer
programs can perform a variety of data analyses and data visualiza-
tions, providing feedback loops for the team to interpret. The team
can then apply new insights to suggest improvements in how the
data and outcomes are measured and ideas for improvement in the
patient process. (Adapted from: Ramshaw [9])
72      B. Tugertimur and B. Ramshaw

     complex problems that we see in healthcare, the goal of a
     sustainable healthcare system will continue to be elusive.
     The ensemble learning concepts have been described by
     the Google AI team as federated learning and federated
     analytics. There are significant benefits to this model for
     learning. The complexity is reduced by combining the
     learning from many small teams and networking that
     knowledge (ensemble learning). And because the raw
     data remains in each local environment, the data’s pri-
     vacy and security are maintained. There are examples of
     ensemble learning in healthcare, used to accurately pre-
     dict the diagnosis of Type 2 diabetes and maintain privacy
     [14, 15]. There is even a recent example of an ensemble
     learning model for diagnosing COVID-19 from routine
     blood tests [16].


Real-World Application of Systems Science
Starting in 2010, the senior author (BR), working with a
small, diverse hernia team, began to apply systems science
principles to real patient care as described above. Two
­examples of using the principles of CQI and nonlinear ana-
 lytical tools with feedback loops are described below.


 liminating Drains for Abdominal Wall
E
Reconstruction (AWR)
As a part of our hernia CQI program, we have regularly
obtained feedback and input from hernia patients and their
family members to get ideas for improvement. Over time, we
recognized that many patients had negative experiences with
abdominal wall drains. Patients did not like the irritation, dis-
comfort, and hassle of drains, especially when they had to
manage them outside of the hospital. We even had one patient
who developed an infection at the site where the drain tubing
exited the skin, with no problem at the actual incision site.
  Chapter 4.   Understanding Complex Systems and How...       73

   In an attempt to improve our AWR process, our hernia
team did a literature search and found techniques developed
by plastic surgeons for abdominoplasty that led to the elimina-
tion of abdominal wall drains. These techniques demonstrated
better rates of wound complications such as infection, hema-
toma, and seroma. We were already moving toward techniques
to minimize the elevation of skin flaps – first using endoscopic
approaches for external oblique component separation and
then using the transversus abdominus release (TAR) approach.
We added the techniques of wide skin and soft tissue excision,
including excision of the umbilicus, and the use of layered
quilting (also known as tension reduction) sutures to eliminate
the dead space and tension on the skin closure. Although this
did increase the operative time (a new improvement opportu-
nity), the rate of wound complications decreased without using
a single drain over the next several years [17].


 nderstanding Chronic Pain After Inguinal Hernia
U
Repair
During one of our hernia team CQI meetings, we were look-
ing at the patients who suffered from chronic pain after ingui-
nal hernia repair and had complications after an operation to
relieve their pain. We looked at our operative techniques and
the typical patient factors like BMI and smoking, but nothing
seemed to explain a pattern for these patients who had bad
outcomes. Our patient care manager then spoke up and noted
that the patients who had bad outcomes appeared to be the
same patients that were more challenging to deal with before
surgery.
   She described patterns in these patients – some were
angry, some had unrealistic expectations (especially those
expecting a “quick fix”), and some had high anxiety and/or
controlling personalities. We didn’t yet know how to measure
this, but we thought this might be an important pattern. We
needed some sort of measurement tool. Lacking much exper-
tise in this area at the time, we settled on a subjective measure
74    B. Tugertimur and B. Ramshaw

we called “emotional complexity,” and we put patients in
categories of either high, medium, or low.
   As the next 6–9 months went by, we recorded emotional
complexity and a few dozen other data points. The subse-
quent analysis of the data we ran showed that the emotional
complexity was the highest modifiable factor predicting our
patients’ outcomes.
   When we found that this was such an important factor, we
invited a small group of social science experts to our next
CQI meeting to develop a more robust measurement tool
[18]. As we learned about the impact of a patient’s neurocog-
nitive/emotional state on surgical outcomes from the analysis
of data in our patients, we found that this is not that surpris-
ing based on recent research in neuroscience and the neuro-
physiologic impact that traumatic events can have on the
brain.
   This insight led to the presurgical evaluation of patients’
neurocognitive/emotional issues and implementation of
cognitive-­behavioral therapy (CBT) as part of a “prehabilita-
tion” program for most patients. Since the implementation of
this preoperative optimization program, we have seen better
outcomes. Some patients were even able to cancel surgery
because their pain was improved during this prehabilitation
program [19].


 ystems Science Applied to Healthcare
S
in Policy and Education
The use of systems science in other industries such as finance,
sports, and the military has proven successful. The need to
change our reductionist mentality in surgery and medicine is
recognized at the national level in the United States, as evi-
denced by the 21st Century Cures Act, signed into law
December 13, 2016. A portion of the law is designed to create
a framework for utilizing real-world evidence in the FDA
regulatory process for approving drugs and biological prod-
ucts with “data regarding the usage, or the potential benefits
or risks… from sources other than traditional clinical trials.”
  Chapter 4.   Understanding Complex Systems and How...        75

As mentioned by Corrigan-Curry et al. in JAMA Viewpoint
on September 4, 2018, an important caveat in the effective
practice of guiding national policy will be the need for
“shared learning and collaboration across clinicians, patients,
health care systems, pharmaceutical companies, and regula-
tors” [20]. While randomized clinical trials currently remain
recognized as the gold standard for generating medical and
scientific evidence, their limitations in cost, time consump-
tion, and, most importantly, generalizability among popula-
tions in a dynamic environment are increasingly becoming
recognized.
   Lastly, the importance of systems science in healthcare has
trickled down to the medical school curriculum for future
physicians’ early exposure. In 2013, as part of its “Accelerating
Change in Medical Education” and “forward-thinking” initia-
tive, the AMA created an initial consortium of 11 medical
schools including the Pennsylvania State University College
of Medicine and the Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown
University, to integrate systems science directly into the
medical school curriculum as a “third science.” Designed as
the third pillar of medical education alongside and equal to
basic and clinical science, the goal of this initiative is to pro-
mote quality improvement, team science, leadership, socio-
ecological determinants of health, healthcare policy, and
economics to prepare the physicians of tomorrow for the
evolution of healthcare for a sustainable future based on
quality and value. As of 2020, the AMA’s consortium consists
of 37 medical schools from around the nation [21, 22].


Conclusion
While reductionist science was critical in advancing humanity
and healthcare for the past several centuries, using the same
anachronistic approach in the era of exponential change and
increases in information not only hampers progress but also
potentially misguides us despite our good intentions. The
reality of the unsustainable nature of our current healthcare
system is apparent. The prospect of change is not an easy one,
but as human beings, we are a complex species that have, time
76     B. Tugertimur and B. Ramshaw

and time again, proven to be capable of adapting as we gain
knowledge and as the world evolves. While our paradigm
shift to systems science may be in its infancy, its recognition
represents our first steps into the future of evolving health-
care to be centered around the patient through individuality,
value, and sustainability.
   There are no shortcuts when applying systems science to
healthcare or any other industry. If the whole context is not
defined, if data is analyzed without understanding the context
from which it was obtained, or if process improvements are
applied only to a subprocess, the outcome will not be ideal. In
other industries, this might lead to an unsatisfied customer,
but when the process is a patient care process, the result
might include unintended and potentially preventable human
suffering. We need to learn to apply systems science p­ rinciples
to measure and improve value in the context of the whole,
definable patient processes if we want a sustainable global
healthcare system. From reductionist thinking, there is a com-
monly used saying that “the devil is in the details,” but with
an understanding of systems science, there is a need to com-
plete the thought: “but an angel can be found in understand-
ing the whole.”


References
 1. Kricheldorf H. Getting it right in science and medicine: can sci-
    ence progress through errors? Fallacies and facts. Cham: Springer
    International Publishing; 2016. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-319-30386-4.
 2. Montague G. Who am I? Who is she?: a naturalistic, holistic,
    somatic approach to personal identity. Piscataway: Transaction
    Books; 2012. p. 308. ISBN 978-3-86838-144-3.
 3. Obermeyer Z, Powers B, Vageli C, Mullainathan S. Dissecting
    racial bias in an algorithm used to manage the health of popula-
    tions. Science. 2019;366:477–53.
 4. Wasserstein R, Lazar N. The ASA statement on p-values: con-
    text, process, and purpose. Am Stat. 2016;70(2):129–33.
 5. Calabrese V, Cornelius C, Trovato A, et al. The hormetic role of
    dietary antioxidants in free radical-related diseases. Curr Pharm
    Des. 2010;16(7):877–83.
  Chapter 4.   Understanding Complex Systems and How...            77

 6. Bouayed J, Bohn T. Exogenous antioxidants--double-edged
    swords in cellular redox state: H\health beneficial effects at
    physiologic doses versus deleterious effects at high doses. Oxid
    Med Cell Longev. 2010;3(4):228–37.
 7. Kaput J, Perozzi G, Radonjic M, Virgill F. Propelling the para-
    digm shift from reductionism to systems nutrition. Genes Nutr.
    2017;12:3.
 8. Fardet A, Rock E. From a reductionist to a holistic approach
    in preventative nutrition to define new and more ethical para-
    digms. Healthcare. 2015;3:1054–63.
 9. Ramshaw B. An introduction to complex systems science and
    its application to hernia surgery. In: Hope W, editor. Textbook of
    hernia. Cham: Springer International Publishing; 2017. p. 7–13.
10. Ramshaw B. Applying systems and complexity science to real
    patient care. J Eval Clin Pract. 2020;26(5):1559–63.
11. Ramshaw B, Forman B, Barker E, Grimsley L. The value propo-
    sition for complex abdominal wall reconstruction: how to make
    it work. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2018;142(3 Suppl):173S–9S.
12. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Quality
    improvement activities FAQs. Available at http://www.hhs.gov/
    ohrp/policy/faq/quality-­improvement-­activities/. Accessed 20 Jan
    2015.
13. Prescott H, Costa D. Improving long-term outcomes after sepsis.
    Crit Care Clin. 2018;34(1):175–88.
14. Yang T, Zhang L, Yi L, et al. Ensemble learning models based on
    noninvasive features for type 2 diabetes screening: model devel-
    opment and validation. JMIR Med Inform. 2020;8(6):e15431.
15. Yao Q, Guo X, Kwok J, et al. Privacy-preserving stacking
    with application to cross-organizational diabetes prediction.
    Proceedings of the twenty-eighth joint international conference
    on artificial intelligence (IJCAI-19):4114–20.
16. AlJame M, Ahmad I, Imtiaz A, Mohammed A. Ensemble learn-
    ing model for diagnosing COVID-19 from routine blood tests.
    Info Med Unlocked. 2020;21:100449.
17. Ramshaw B, Dean J, Forman B, et al. Can abdominal wall
    reconstruction be safely performed without drains? Am Surg.
    2016;82(8):707–12.
18. Ramshaw B, Vetrano V, Jagadish M, et al. Laparoscopic approach
    for the treatment of chronic groin pain after inguinal hernia
    repair. Surg Endosc. 2017;31(12):5267–74.
19. Landry M, Lewis R, Lew M, et al. Evaluating effectiveness of
    cognitive behavioral therapy within multimodal treatment for
78     B. Tugertimur and B. Ramshaw

    chronic groin pain after inguinal hernia repair. Surg Endosc.
    2020;34(7):3145–52.
20. Corrigan-Curay J, Sacks L, Woodcock J. Real-world evidence
    and real-world data for evaluating drug safety and effectiveness.
    JAMA. 2018;320(9):867–8.
21. Just in time for the holidays: AMA’s health systems sci-
    ence textbook. American Medical Association. n.d.
    https://www.ama-­a ssn.org/press-­c enter/press-­r eleases/
    just-­time-­holidays-­ama-­s-­health-­systems-­science-­textbook.
22. Member schools of the consortium. American Medical
    Association. 2020, January 24. https://www.ama-­assn.
    org/education/accelerating-­c hange-­m edical-­e ducation/
    member-­schools-­consortium.
Chapter 5
Clinical Care Pathways
Michael R. Keating and Benjamin E. Schneider




What Is a Clinical Care Pathway?
When discussing how clinical pathways may be used in sur-
gery to improve outcomes, it is important to first define
“clinical care pathway.” This would seem to be a simple ques-
tion. However, the surgical literature contains many different
terms that have been used to define a “clinical pathway,” such
as critical pathway, care pathway, care map, and integrated
care pathway. Though there is no universally accepted defini-
tion, Kinsman et al. attempted to create a set of criteria to
define a clinical pathway. These include:
1. The intervention is a structured multidisciplinary plan of
   care.
2. The intervention was used to translate guidelines or evi-
   dence into local structures.
3. The intervention detailed the steps in a course of treat-
   ment or care in a plan, algorithm, guideline, protocol, or
   other “inventory of actions.”
4. The intervention had timelines or criteria-based
   progression.


M. R. Keating · B. E. Schneider (*)
University of Texas Southwestern, Dallas, TX, USA

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature   79
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_5
80    M. R. Keating and B. E. Schneider

5. The intervention aimed to standardize care for a specific
   clinical problem, procedure, or episode of healthcare in a
   specific population.
    The authors proposed that if the first criterion was met,
then three of the four following criteria being met were suf-
ficient for consideration as a clinical care pathway [1].
    The European Pathway Association defines a care path-
way as “a complex intervention for the mutual decision mak-
ing and organization of care processes for a well-defined
group of patients during a well-defined period. The aim of a
care pathway is to enhance the quality of care across the con-
tinuum by improving risk-adjusted patient outcomes, pro-
moting patient safety, increasing patient satisfaction, and
optimizing the use of resources” [2].


 ow Are Clinical Pathways Used in Surgery
H
and How Do They Improve Outcomes?
The intent behind clinical pathways can be broken into two
general categories. The first is to improve efficiency of health-
care delivery in order to decrease healthcare costs by, for
example, decreasing length of hospital stay. The second is to
implement standardized, evidence-based interventions to
improve patient outcomes and/or decrease complications
(e.g., VTE prophylaxis, multimodal pain therapy). Obviously,
there is significant overlap between these two, in that inter-
ventions often achieve both decreasing cost of healthcare
delivery and improvement of patient outcomes. The most
well-known clinical care pathways to surgeons are the
enhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS) protocols. The goals
of ERAS protocols are preoperative patient optimization,
decrease in perioperative stress, maintaining normal postop-
erative physiologic function, and accelerated recovery time
[3]. These protocols were initially developed for cardiac sur-
gery and became much more widespread with their use in
colorectal surgery. However, now they are used in many dif-
                       Chapter 5.   Clinical Care Pathways     81

ferent areas of surgery including bariatric, breast, hepatic,
pancreatic, orthopedic, and thoracic surgery. The ERAS
Society is an international organization with the mission to
“develop perioperative care and to improve recovery through
research, education, audit, and implementation of evidence-­
based practice” [4]. They have published evidence-based
guidelines for numerous specialties including colorectal and
bariatric surgery with variations for each specialty where
appropriate. This section will touch base on general recom-
mendations for each phase of care but not meant to be
exhaustive. The general format for these clinical pathways is
to break them down into preoperative, intraoperative, and
postoperative categories.


Preoperative Recommendations
Preoperative recommendations can be further subcatego-
rized into preadmission and post-admission components.
Medical optimization often involves evaluation by other phy-
sicians including primary care physicians, cardiologists, pul-
monologists, and anesthesiologists. Examples may include
identifying patients with obstructive sleep apnea and ensur-
ing that they are being appropriately treated with continuous
positive airway pressure (CPAP) devices or ensuring that
diabetic patients have adequate glycemic control [5].
Nutritional supplementation may be sought in patients who
are malnourished [6]. Smoking cessation (generally for at
least 4 weeks) is encouraged in all patients prior to surgery in
order to improve respiratory function and decrease wound
healing complications. Similarly, alcohol cessation in patients
with alcohol abuse is generally recommended for 4 weeks,
though in bariatric programs where patients are required to
commit to lifelong behavioral changes, preoperative alcohol
cessation may be recommended for 1–2 years [7]. Preoperative
weight loss, especially in bariatric surgery patients, can make
surgery less difficult due to decreased size of the liver but also
is associated with decreased complication rates [7]. Another
82    M. R. Keating and B. E. Schneider

vital (though often overlooked) component of successful
clinical pathways is preoperative education and counseling,
which aids in decreasing anxiety and improving compliance
by setting expectations for patients and their families [7]. One
study even found that an ERAS program with staff focused
on preoperative stoma education including education on the
patient’s role in caring for their stoma, routines after surgery,
and hands-on practice changing stoma appliances was associ-
ated with a significant decrease in hospital length of stay [8].
   Post-admission preoperative recommendations include
limited fasting, preoperative carbohydrate loading, nausea
prophylaxis, and antimicrobial prophylaxis. Despite tradi-
tional surgical dogma requiring patients to be nil per os
(NPO) after midnight due to concerns for aspiration risk,
recent studies have shown that patients may safely have clear
liquids up to 2 h before surgery (the current recommendation
for solids is 6 h before surgery) with no increase in gastric
residual at time of OR, no increase in gastric pH, and no
increase in complication rates. Additionally, preoperative
fasting leads to decreased liver glycogen stores and increased
insulin resistance [9]. Preoperative carbohydrate loading with
a low osmolar carbohydrate-rich drink has also been shown
to improve insulin resistance, decrease postoperative nausea,
and be associated with a decreased hospital length of stay
[9–12]. Multimodal nausea prophylaxis is encouraged, includ-
ing a single dose of dexamethasone given by anesthesia hav-
ing been shown to be effective and safe in preventing
postoperative nausea and vomiting.


Intraoperative Recommendations
Intraoperative protocols largely focus on maintaining homeo-
stasis and controlling pain while minimizing narcotic use.
Neuraxial anesthesia and blocks with local anesthetic have
been shown to decrease postoperative narcotic use.
Transversus abdominus plane (TAP) blocks have been shown
to significantly decrease narcotic use on postoperative day 1
                      Chapter 5.   Clinical Care Pathways    83

as well as significantly decrease time to first bowel movement
without differences in postoperative complications [13].
Minimally invasive techniques are well established as safe
and have been associated with significantly reduced compli-
cations and length of stay [12]. Perioperative fluid overload is
associated with postoperative ileus, and restrictive periopera-
tive fluid strategies are associated with reduced complica-
tions [12, 14]. Other components of the intraoperative
protocols include avoiding hypothermia, strict glycemic con-
trol, and decreased use of surgical drains including nasogas-
tric tubes [6].


Postoperative Recommendations
In the postoperative phase of care, the focus is on rapidly
returning the patient to a normal state of function and, per-
haps even more than pre- or intraoperative phases, highlights
the multidisciplinary nature of care pathways. Early mobiliza-
tion with physical therapy and occupational therapy is essen-
tial to ensure the patient maintains strength and functional
mobility as well as anticipating discharge needs. Early initia-
tion of PO nutrition has been associated with decreased
length of stay, faster time to return of bowel function, and no
increase in complication rates including anastomotic leak or
pulmonary complications [9]. It can be useful to involve
nutritionists postoperatively as well, especially for certain
populations, such as bariatric patients, both for inpatient
guidance and patient education. Multimodal pain control is
another common component of the postoperative protocol
and may include acetaminophen, gabapentin, and NSAIDs.
The goal of multimodal therapy is to improve pain control
while concurrently minimizing narcotics. Minimizing narcot-
ics in turn results in decreased nausea and decreased postop-
erative ileus. Early involvement of social workers in the
postoperative phase can also help with discharge planning to
avoid delays in discharge.
84    M. R. Keating and B. E. Schneider

Impact of Clinical Pathways in Surgery
Clinical pathways are multidisciplinary care plans that stan-
dardize patient care with evidence-based practices and inter-
ventions. Their goals are to minimize variability in care
deliver, reduce healthcare costs, and improve patient out-
comes. Initially, there was some questions as to whether care
pathways were safe. One early study by Calligaro et al. in
1995 examined the impact of clinical pathways on hospital
costs and outcomes after major vascular surgery. They found
that by arranging for much of the preoperative workup (arte-
riography, cardiac, and anesthesia evaluation) to be done in
the outpatient setting rather than during a preoperative
admission, and by establishing inpatient clinical pathways,
they were able to significantly decrease hospital length of
stay and hospital costs with no difference in complications or
readmission rates. However, it is worth noting that they did
not calculate outpatient costs or costs of skilled nursing facili-
ties. There was also an increased burden on the surgeon and
staff in the outpatient setting [15]. A systematic review from
2008 examined indicators used to evaluate clinical pathways,
including length of stay, mortality, complication rates, and
readmissions. These effects were broken into five categories:
financial (length of stay, medical costs), clinical (complication
rates, readmission rates), process (number of clinical exams,
analysis of deviations), team (team communication/satisfac-
tion), and service (patient satisfaction). The most common
domains reported on were financial and clinical, with 87% of
controlled studies noting a positive effect in the financial
domain and 47% of controlled studies noting a positive effect
in the clinical domain; importantly, no studies noted a nega-
tive effect of clinical pathways. The authors also commented
that “the impact of a clinical pathway will depend on the
goals of the project. When a team is only trying to improve
the efficiency, we will not find improvements on clinical qual-
ity of care or patient safety” [16].
   A 2009 prospective cohort study evaluated more granular
effects of a clinical pathway in surgery, primarily focused on
                       Chapter 5.   Clinical Care Pathways    85

cost, and found that with a clinical pathway, there was a
decrease in unnecessary testing (such as EKGs or lab tests),
decreased total nursing time required per patient, decreased
hospital length of stay by 23%, and a total cost reduction of
25% with no differences in complications or readmissions
[17]. The ERAS compliance group also examined the impact
of ERAS protocol compliance on outcomes after elective
colorectal surgery. They found that both laparoscopic surgery
and ERAS protocol compliance were associated with signifi-
cantly reduced complications and shorter length of stay. They
also found that preoperative carbohydrate loading and
totally intravenous anesthesia were associated with shorter
hospital stay and that restrictive perioperative fluid use was
associated with reduced complications [12]. A systematic
review and meta-analysis examining outcomes with ERAS in
bariatrics from 2017 found a significant reduction in length of
stay. There was also a trend toward decreased readmission
and cost reduction, but these were not statistically significant.
They found no difference in morbidity, specific complications,
or mortality [18]. Similarly, a single-center study comparing
outcomes before and after initiating a bariatric ERAS pro-
gram found significantly decreased length of stay in the
ERAS group, with no difference in readmission rate, reopera-
tion rate, 30-day morbidity including bleeding or leak, or
mortality [5].
   In 2012 a single-center controlled study focusing on effects
of clinical pathways for bariatrics on perioperative quality of
care found increased rates of timely epidural removal, faster
removal of Foley catheters, increased patient mobilization on
the day of surgery, faster adoption of oral nutritional supple-
ments, and a decreased length of stay with no impact on mor-
bidity or mortality [19]. A retrospective cohort study from
2020 evaluating the effects of clinical pathways (CPs) on
outcomes in patients undergoing a Whipple procedure found
that catheters and abdominal drains were removed faster in
the CP group, first intake of PO liquids, nutritional support
and solids was faster in the CP group, exocrine insufficiency
was less common in the CP group, and there was decreased
86      M. R. Keating and B. E. Schneider

intraoperative transfusion in the CP group. There were no
differences in morbidity, mortality, reoperation, or readmis-
sion rates [20].


 hat Are Best Practices That Have
W
Successfully Integrated Clinical Care
Pathways?
Implementing a successful ERAS protocol is undeniably
challenging, and there are many barriers to success. Some of
these include poor communication, resistance to change by
staff, lack of institutional support, and additional work
imposed by the auditing process, among others. One of the
cornerstones of a successful ERAS protocol is its multidisci-
plinary approach which can involve:
•    Surgeons
•    Outpatient staff
•    Preoperative nurses
•    Anesthesiologists
•    Operating room nurses
•    Recovery room/PACU staff
•    Nurses on the surgical floor
•    Dieticians
•    Pharmacists
•    Physical therapists
•    Social workers
   It can be effective to arrange these pieces into a team
structure to divide responsibilities and delineate roles. A 2017
review by Ljunqvist detailed one example of this structure.
For clinical pathways in surgery, the surgeon is one of the few
members of the team who is present at each step of the
patient’s care and thus has a more global view of the patient’s
trajectory. Therefore, a surgeon is often the leader of the
team, with close anesthesiologist support. Project managers
and coordinators can help organize resources, obtain man-
agement approval, and address practical matters such as
                      Chapter 5.   Clinical Care Pathways    87

arranging for education of personnel, creating instructional
materials, and auditing the protocol outcomes/adherence.
Finally, ancillary services, such as physical therapists and
nutritionists, may play specific roles depending on the proto-
col that has been created. Ljunqvist also recommends sched-
uling regular meetings, especially at the outset of the program,
to evaluate compliance and troubleshoot problems that may
arise. Finally, it is important to audit the process, measuring
both adherence to the protocol and outcomes. The ERAS
Society created the ERAS interactive audit system for this
purpose [10]. This allows one to determine:
1. Whether or not the interventions are effective (e.g., time to
   return to enteral feeding, time to defecate, pain scores)
2. If the protocols are safe (complication rates, number of
   readmissions, reoperations, ICU admissions, mortality, etc.)
3. Whether results may be skewed by poor adherence to cer-
   tain parts of the protocol
   A recent systematic review evaluating staff experiences
with ERAS confirmed the importance of effective multidisci-
plinary communication, educating staff and patients, and
appointing dedicated “champions” to implement an ERAS
protocol [21].


Conclusion
Clinical pathways, while a relatively new idea, have a large
body of literature from the last several decades which dem-
onstrate that they are safe and can achieve their purpose of
reducing healthcare costs while concurrently improving
patient outcomes. There are excellent resources to initiate
and refine clinical pathways, starting with the ERAS Society
guidelines which are evidence based, available for free, and
regularly updated. When implementing a clinical pathway, it
is important to focus on the multidisciplinary approach, good
communication, and being mindful to audit the process in
order to ensure adherence and refine it over time.
88     M. R. Keating and B. E. Schneider

References
 1. Kinsman L, Rotter T, James E, Snow P, Willis J. What is a clini-
    cal pathway? Development of a definition to inform the debate.
    BMC Med. 2010;8:31. https://doi.org/10.1186/1741-­7015-­8-­31.
 2. European Pathway Association | CARE PATHWAYS. Accessed
    21 Nov 2020. http://e-­p-­a.org/care-­pathways/.
 3. Gustafsson UO, Scott MJ, Hubner M, et al. Guidelines for
    perioperative care in elective colorectal surgery: Enhanced
    Recovery After Surgery (ERAS®) Society recommendations:
    2018. World J Surg. 2019;43(3):659–95. https://doi.org/10.1007/
    s00268-­0 18-­4844-­y.
 4. List of guidelines. Eras. Accessed 22 Nov 2020. https://erassoci-
    ety.org/guidelines/list-­of-­guidelines/.
 5. Trotta M, Ferrari C, D’Alessandro G, Sarra G, Piscitelli G, Marinari
    GM. Enhanced recovery after bariatric surgery (ERABS) in a
    high-volume bariatric center. Surg Obes Relat Dis Off J Am
    Soc Bariatr Surg. 2019;15(10):1785–92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
    soard.2019.06.038.
 6. Smith TW, Wang X, Singer MA, Godellas CV, Vaince
    FT. Enhanced recovery after surgery: a clinical review of imple-
    mentation across multiple surgical subspecialties. Am J Surg.
    2020;219(3):530–4. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amjsurg.2019.11.009.
 7. Thorell A, MacCormick AD, Awad S, et al. Guidelines for
    perioperative care in bariatric surgery: Enhanced Recovery
    After Surgery (ERAS) Society recommendations. World J Surg.
    2016;40(9):2065–83. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00268-­0 16-­3492-­3.
 8. Forsmo HM, Pfeffer F, Rasdal A, Sintonen H, Körner H,
    Erichsen C. Pre- and postoperative stoma education and guid-
    ance within an enhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS) pro-
    gramme reduces length of hospital stay in colorectal surgery. Int
    J Surg Lond Engl. 2016;36(Pt A):121–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
    ijsu.2016.10.031.
 9. Bisch S, Nelson G, Altman A. Impact of nutrition on enhanced
    recovery after surgery (ERAS) in gynecologic oncology.
    Nutrients. 2019;11(5). https://doi.org/10.3390/nu11051088.
10. Ljungqvist O, Scott M, Fearon KC. Enhanced recovery after
    surgery: a review. JAMA Surg. 2017;152(3):292–8. https://doi.
    org/10.1001/jamasurg.2016.4952.
11. Yilmaz N, Cekmen N, Bilgin F, Erten E, Ozhan MÖ, Coşar
    A. Preoperative carbohydrate nutrition reduces postoperative
                          Chapter 5.    Clinical Care Pathways       89

      nausea and vomiting compared to preoperative fasting. J Res
      Med Sci Off J Isfahan Univ Med Sci. 2013;18(10):827–32.
12.   ERAS Compliance Group. The impact of enhanced recovery pro-
      tocol compliance on elective colorectal cancer resection: results
      from an international registry. Ann Surg. 2015;261(6):1153–9.
      https://doi.org/10.1097/SLA.0000000000001029.
13.   Hain E, Maggiori L, Prost À la Denise J, Panis Y. Transversus
      abdominis plane (TAP) block in laparoscopic colorectal
      surgery improves postoperative pain management: a meta-­
      analysis. Colorectal Dis Off J Assoc Coloproctology G B Irel.
      2018;20(4):279–87. https://doi.org/10.1111/codi.14037.
14.   Bragg D, El-Sharkawy AM, Psaltis E, Maxwell-Armstrong
      CA, Lobo DN. Postoperative ileus: recent developments in
      pathophysiology and management. Clin Nutr Edinb Scotl.
      2015;34(3):367–76. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clnu.2015.01.016.
15.   Calligaro KD, Dougherty MJ, Raviola CA, Musser DJ,
      DeLaurentis DA. Impact of clinical pathways on hospital costs
      and early outcome after major vascular surgery. J Vasc Surg.
      1995;22(6):649–57; discussion 657-660. https://doi.org/10.1016/
      s0741-­5214(95)70055-­2.
16.   Lemmens L, van Zelm R, Vanhaecht K, Kerkkamp H. Systematic
      review: indicators to evaluate effectiveness of clinical pathways
      for gastrointestinal surgery. J Eval Clin Pract. 2008;14(5):880–7.
      https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-­2753.2008.01079.x.
17.   Müller MK, Dedes KJ, Dindo D, Steiner S, Hahnloser D, Clavien
      P-A. Impact of clinical pathways in surgery. Langenbecks
      Arch Surg. 2009;394(1):31–9. https://doi.org/10.1007/
      s00423-­0 08-­0352-­0.
18.   Małczak P, Pisarska M, Piotr M, Wysocki M, Budzyński A,
      Pędziwiatr M. Enhanced recovery after bariatric surgery: sys-
      tematic review and meta-analysis. Obes Surg. 2017;27(1):226–35.
      https://doi.org/10.1007/s11695-­0 16-­2438-­z.
19.   Ronellenfitsch U, Schwarzbach M, Kring A, Kienle P, Post S,
      Hasenberg T. The effect of clinical pathways for bariatric surgery
      on perioperative quality of care. Obes Surg. 2012;22(5):732–9.
      https://doi.org/10.1007/s11695-­0 12-­0605-­4.
20.   Téoule P, Kunz B, Schwarzbach M, et al. Influence of clini-
      cal pathways on treatment and outcome quality for patients
      undergoing pancreatoduodenectomy? A retrospective cohort
      study. Asian J Surg. 2020;43(8):799–809. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
      asjsur.2019.10.003.
90    M. R. Keating and B. E. Schneider

21. Cohen R, Gooberman-Hill R. Staff experiences of enhanced
    recovery after surgery: systematic review of qualitative stud-
    ies. BMJ Open. 2019;9(2):e022259. https://doi.org/10.1136/
    bmjopen-­2018-­022259.
Chapter 6
Tracking Quality: Data
Registries
Brenda M. Zosa and Anne O. Lidor



The methods by which we measure quality surgical care have
evolved exponentially over the past 30 years with the growth
of technology, demand for accountability, and pursuit to pro-
vide the highest-quality care for our patients. However, the
framework by which we assess healthcare quality has long
been rooted in the Donabedian principles of structure, pro-
cess, and outcomes [1]. Structure represents the physical,
technological, and human resources of a healthcare system.
These include measures beyond the physical facilities but
also include availability of an electronic medical record and
data on the provider to patient ratio. While often the easiest
to assess, structural measures are the most indirect indicator
of quality. Process measures are related to the way systems
and providers deliver healthcare, such as compliance with
evidence-based guidelines and efficiency of delivering care.
One of the most familiar process measures is the Surgical
Care Improvement Project (SCIP), which, although initially
promising, has had some mixed results with regard to how
much compliance equates to reductions in postoperative

B. M. Zosa · A. O. Lidor (*)
Department of Surgery, Johns Hopkins University SOM,
Baltimore, MD, USA
e-mail: lidor@surgery.wisc.edu

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature   91
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_6
92    B. M. Zosa and A. O. Lidor

morbidity [2, 3]. Outcomes are the metric by which we most
closely scrutinize the quality of the care we provide and is
arguably the most valuable of measures. It is also the most
complex, making “apples to apples” comparisons incredibly
challenging across healthcare systems. Multifactorial influ-
ences are present at every level, and the success of even the
most common procedures is equally affected by the skill of
the surgeon, the patient’s health status, and the ability of a
system to deliver that care and to protect the patient from
inadvertent harm.
   The emergence of national surgical databases has pro-
vided us with platforms to more readily track our outcomes
and make meaningful comparisons through the use of statisti-
cal modeling that allow us to evaluate data in a risk-adjusted
fashion. This enables hospital systems to identify areas of
deficiency, enact a plan of action, and assess the effect of that
plan on defined quality metrics. This chapter describes the
currently existing data registries in surgery and how they
have impacted surgical practice.


Society of Thoracic Surgeons (STS)
For better or worse, the incentive to track quality has often
been driven by payers, most notably the United States
Federal Government. Cardiac surgery was at the heart of the
development of national surgical databases. In 1986 the
Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA), the prede-
cessor to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
(CMS), released mortality reports on hospitals performing as
outliers in cardiac surgery [4]. These reports fueled concern
from both the public sector and surgical societies. The validity
of these reports was highly criticized for lacking appropriate
risk adjustment, in particular when it came to evaluation of
outcomes after coronary artery bypass surgery.
   The STS recognized the need to better assess quality of
care as a surgical specialty and took charge of developing a
national database in 1989 [5]. This was among the first surgi-
            Chapter 6. Tracking Quality: Data Registries    93

cal databases to include granular clinical data and provide
timely risk-adjusted feedback to participating institutions. At
the same time, the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) had
begun a nationwide quality improvement project in cardiac
surgery, the Continuous Improvement in Cardiac Surgery
Program (CICSP). These programs would ultimately lay the
foundation for tracking surgical outcomes and promoting
data-driven quality initiatives across the country.


 ational Surgical Quality Improvement
N
Program (NSQIP)
NSQIP was created in response to a federal mandate in 1985
(Public Law 99-166) aimed at improving outcomes for VA
hospitals. At the time, the VA was under public scrutiny for
high rates of postoperative morbidity and mortality. To
address this issue, they first needed to create a system that
would allow them to track risk-adjusted outcomes. The
National VA Surgical Risk Study was conducted, which col-
lected prospective data at 44 major VA surgical centers. This
data established predictive models for risk-adjusted out-
comes comparisons that would facilitate assessment of VA
hospital performance and the development of the VA NSQIP
[6, 7]. Through participation in this program, VA hospitals
noted reduction in 30-day mortality after major surgery by
45% and reduction in 30-day mortality by 31% [8]. The fed-
eral mandate also required the VA to compare their surgical
outcomes to the national average, prompting a pilot study in
three academic centers in the private sector which confirmed
the predictive models of the VA NSQIP could be applied to
other systems. The American College of Surgeons (ACS)
then partnered with the VA to conduct the Patient Safety in
Surgery (PSS) Study which included 18 non-VA sites and
provided further evidence of the validity of NSQIP for hospi-
tals across the nation. Over the study period, participating
private sector hospitals noted significant reductions in 30-day
postoperative morbidity by 8.7%, surgical site infections
94    B. M. Zosa and A. O. Lidor

(SSIs) by 9.1%, and renal complications by 23.7% [9]. The
culmination of these findings along with positive feedback
from the participating sites led to the official establishment of
the ACS NSQIP for public enrollment in 2004.
    ACS NSQIP became the first nationally validated, risk-­
adjusted, outcomes-based program for measuring outcomes
in a variety of surgical subspecialties, with the ultimate goal
of improving the quality of surgical care. Since its creation,
ACS NSQIP has become an instrumental tool in quality
improvements, outcomes research, and the development of
an affective risk calculator. Today over 700 hospitals partici-
pate in ACS NSQIP. Preoperative data and 30-day outcomes
are recorded for a variety of general and subspecialty surger-
ies by trained surgical clinical reviewers (SCRs). Hospitals
are given semiannual reports on their own risk-adjusted out-
comes and offered a blinded comparison to other participat-
ing hospitals. This has led to establishment of national
benchmarks and various efforts by the ACS to support qual-
ity improvement efforts across institutions. Long-term par-
ticipation in NSQIP has been associated with a reduction in
30-day morbidity and mortality. Studies by both Hall and
Cohen found reductions in mortality in 66–69% and reduced
morbidity in 79–82% of participating hospitals [10, 11].
However, others have been critical that mere participation in
NSQIP is not enough to improve outcomes. Two studies com-
paring outcomes of NSQIP hospitals to nonparticipating
centers found no statistically significant difference in postop-
erative morbidity over time, suggesting that improved out-
comes may be more reflective of regression to the mean over
time for certain outliers [12, 13]. In particular, Osbourne et al.
[12] found no differences in Medicare payments before and
after participation in ACS NSQIP when using nonparticipat-
ing hospitals as a control.
    It is clear that hospital systems must be committed to
improving care and implementing quality improvement proj-
ects to make a meaningful impact. There is a wealth of data
demonstrating that NSQIP data can serve as a catalyst for
change and facilitate monitoring the influence quality
            Chapter 6. Tracking Quality: Data Registries      95

improvement initiatives have on targeted outcomes.
Examples include a single center initiative at decreasing
ventilator time, leading to an eventual zero pneumonia rate,
and numerous programs aimed at reducing surgical site
infections, in particular after colorectal surgery [14–17].
Beyond local feedback, ACS NSQIP empowers change
through the development of collaboratives and best practice
guidelines. Currently there are over 65 collaboratives that
vary in size and function. These range from health system-
wide, regional, to virtual collaboratives. Among the most
notable, the Michigan Surgical Quality Collaborative
(MSQC) demonstrated improved morbidity in participating
hospitals when compared to a non-­Michigan ACS NSQIP
cohort. This was particularly true when it came to reductions
in sepsis, pneumonia, septic shock, cardiac arrest, and need
for prolonged mechanical ventilation [18]. The Tennessee
Surgical Quality Collaborative also showed significant
improvements in surgical site infections (SSIs), decreasing
prolonged ventilation, AKI, and wound disruption [19].
Additionally, they estimated a cost savings of over $2,000,000
per 10,000 general and vascular surgery cases.
   It is important to note that there is a significant investment
incurred by the participating centers. The annual fee ranges
from $10,000 to $29,000 a year, but the majority of the cost is
in the salary for the SCR, which can range anywhere from
$40,000 to $100,000 a year. While NSQIP does not capture
cost data, several studies have deduced a cost savings from
participating in ACS NSQIP by reducing the incidence of
complications [17, 20–23].


 etabolic and Bariatric Surgery Accreditation
M
and Quality Improvement Program
(MBSAQIP)
Tracking quality outcomes has become the cornerstone of
accreditation for centers of excellence (COE) in bariatric
care. In 2012 the ACS Bariatric Surgery Center Network and
96    B. M. Zosa and A. O. Lidor

the American Society for Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery
(ASMBS) Bariatric Centers of Excellence combined their
respective programs to form MBSAQIP. This now serves as
the accreditation body and has created a single bariatric data-
base which over 800 participating institutions currently con-
tribute to. The MBSAQIP database captures high-quality
data for the majority of bariatric surgeries that take place in
the United States and Canada. An important distinction
between NSQIP and MBSAQIP is that while NSQIP ran-
domly samples cases, and thus can miss outliers, MBSAQIP is
required to include 100% of bariatric cases at participating
centers, thus ensuring a more robust data set.
    In addition to bariatric-specific perioperative variables
and 30-day outcomes, long-term follow-up data are recorded
at 6 months, 1 year, and annually thereafter. The MBSAQIP
has recently developed a patient-reported outcome measures
(PROMs) program which will send surveys to patients preop-
eratively, 1-year post-op, and then annually. Semiannual site-­
specific reports are provided to participating institutions
allowing them to benchmark their outcomes to the national
average. Accredited sites are required to develop at least one
quality improvement initiative per year, and centers who are
high outliers for any given measure must address and imple-
ment an initiative geared toward reducing that outcome.
    MBSAQIP not only stimulates quality improvement ini-
tiatives on an individual hospital level, but it has demon-
strated that it can facilitate them on a much larger scale. The
first national quality improvement collaborative out of the
MBSAQIP was aimed at decreasing rates of readmissions.
The “Decreasing Readmissions through Opportunities
Provided” (DROP) program implemented a bundle at 128
hospitals and demonstrated a 10% reduction in 30-day read-
missions overall, with even larger reductions at 32% in cen-
ters with the highest rates [24]. Subsequently, the Employing
Enhanced Recovery Goals in Bariatric Surgery (ENERGY)
study showed successful implementation of an enhanced
            Chapter 6. Tracking Quality: Data Registries      97

recovery program across 36 sites with high rates of extended
length of stay after bariatric surgery. Adherence to the proto-
col at targeted centers led to significant decreases in extended
length of stay without compromising other outcomes [25].
    A recent article by Clapp et al. highlighted the impressive
volume of research that has emerged since the release of the
first Participant Use Data File (PUF) in 2015, citing 55 pub-
lished manuscripts and 126 abstracts [26]. It is clear that
MBSAQIP has had a resounding impact on surgical research
and has proven to be a valuable resource to evaluate out-
comes in an evolving field. Over the last 10 years, we have
seen a rapid growth in the number of laparoscopic sleeve
gastrectomies, becoming the most common bariatric proce-
dure performed. The detailed data captured regarding sleeve
gastrectomy has allowed for large-scale analysis of specific
technical elements on outcomes. While MBSAQIP data can
be utilized to change practice, it is not immune to reporting
conflicting results. For example, while one study comparing
staple line reinforcement (SLR) to non-reinforced staple
lines [27] noted no difference in leak rates after LSG, another
study [28] noted a paradoxical increase in leak rates after
LSG.
    This database like any is not without its limitations.
Changes in practice over time have likely led to an element
of treatment bias that cannot be accounted for when making
comparisons. An evaluation of the 2015 PUF found various
data quality issues with data completeness, accuracy, and con-
sistency, which could potentially lead to losing as much as
20% of the entered cases [29]. The majority of these were
related to how weight and BMI were recorded, which is
clearly an important metric in bariatric surgery.
    The aggregate data collected through this robust database
has allowed for the creation of a bariatric surgical risk/benefit
calculator which provides individualized estimates of postop-
erative weight loss, resolution of comorbidities, and risk of
developing postoperative complications from either sleeve
gastrectomy or Roux-en-Y gastric bypass.
98    B. M. Zosa and A. O. Lidor

 bdominal Core Health Quality
A
Collaborative (ACHQC)
The ACHQC, previously known as the Americas Hernia
Society Quality Collaborative, was established in 2013 with
the aim of improving the quality of care delivered to patients
with ventral hernias. The database formed by this collective is
unique in that it provides continuous real-time, risk-adjusted
data to participating institutions [30]. It was designed to pro-
spectively collect demographics, granular perioperative
details, as well as long-term follow-up data using validated
patient-reported outcome measures. It was also intended to
facilitate multi-institutional investigations of mesh types and
other medical devices in the treatment of hernia disease. A
comparison of biosynthetic to polypropylene mesh in clean-­
contaminated and contaminated wounds using this database
elicited some interesting and unexpected results. While there
was no significant difference in overall surgical site occur-
rences between the two types of mesh, biosynthetic mesh was
associated with higher rates of major wound complications
and unplanned reoperations [31]. By integrating the use of
the registry into their routine clinical practice, the Cleveland
Clinic Center for Abdominal Core Health has found that the
process of conducting a randomized clinical trial was efficient
and ensured high-quality data, as the surgeon who was most
familiar with the patient’s course was the one recording the
data. Through these studies [32, 33], the ACHQC has shown
one example of how disease-specific databases can be imple-
mented to further surgical science.


Summary
This chapter highlights the history and contributions of some
of the most notable surgical databases that are widely used by
general surgeons but by no means encompasses the entire
spectrum of high-quality surgical registries that exist. There
are numerous programs in almost every surgical subspecialty
            Chapter 6. Tracking Quality: Data Registries     99

that contribute to advancing global research and quality ini-
tiatives. The ACS Trauma Quality Improvement Program
(ACS TQIP), Vascular Quality Initiative, Organ Procurement
and Transplantation Network, and the National Cancer Data
Base (NCDB) are some of the extensive list of quality
improvement programs that are currently utilized in surgical
practice.
   The American Board of Surgery (ABS) recognizes the
importance of tracking quality not only on a national level
but also for the individual surgeon. As part of the continuous
certification process for diplomates, participation in practice
improvement is required, either through contributions to one
of the national quality improvement registries or by creating
an independent practice improvement plan. The goal of the
practice improvement requirement is “for diplomates to reg-
ularly assess their performance, by reviewing their outcomes,
addressing identified areas for improvement, and evaluating
the results” [34]. The ABS provides access to the Surgeon
Specific Registry (SSR), an online quality improvement tool,
where surgeons can track their own individual cases and out-
comes independently. This not only facilitates individual
practice improvement but has the added potential of meeting
certain CMS requirements.
   Reliance on databases to measure the quality of surgical
care has its own inherent limitations. Despite the robustness
of the major surgical databases described, there are no doubt
unaccounted risk factors that cannot be adjusted for. True
severity of comorbidities, socioeconomic factors, and treat-
ment biases are almost impossible to capture accurately.
Outcomes measured are often limited to a 30-day postopera-
tive time frame, when many outcomes of interest may not be
evident for a much longer period. This is true for both the
NSQIP and MBSAQIP PUF files that are utilized in most
published studies. While the SCRs undergo rigorous training
and attempts are made to maintain standardized definitions,
the way we define certain events, such as ventilator-­associated
pneumonia, has evolved, making comparisons over time chal-
lenging. As practices continue to evolve, there will also be a
100   B. M. Zosa and A. O. Lidor

need to add new variables. We are already seeing this in bar-
iatric surgery where there is not a variable in the MBSAQIP
to accurately capture revisions from sleeve to gastric bypass.
   Databases have historically lacked quality of life assess-
ments and cost data which are critical for clinicians and inter-
esting to researchers and payers. It is important that surgeons
remain engaged with how those measures are recorded and
evaluated. The CMS and many other payers have shifted
toward pay-for-performance and use performance data to
adjust future payments. Both MBSAQIP and ACHQC are
approved as qualified clinical data registries in the CMS
Merit-based Incentive Payment System (MIPS), which offers
surgeons in independent practice opportunities to achieve a
higher level of reimbursement that is afforded to larger medi-
cal centers that participate in larger programs such as
NSQIP. It is important to note that while the benchmarks
established by data registries are intended to motivate
improvements, oftentimes energy is more focused on “beat-
ing” the quality metric than on actually improving the quality
of care. We must also be critical of the statistically significant
differences we may find when using large data sets that are in
reality of minimal clinically significance.
   Despite the costs and limitations, we must always remem-
ber the overarching goal and purpose of participating in
national surgical databases: to continuously strive to provide
the highest quality of care to the patients entrusted to us.


Editor’s Note

SAGES is and has been interested in data registries for some
time. As you have read in this review of registries, many surgi-
cal societies have invested time and resources into registry
creation. The AHSQC was unique in that it was entirely
funded by industry. Mesh manufacturers were keenly inter-
ested in product performance and likely were willing to invest
in comparative data that showed that their own product per-
formed superiorly to others. While some other product-focused
            Chapter 6. Tracking Quality: Data Registries     101

procedures might also benefit from such robust data collection,
few other disease-specific registries have yet been developed.
One could imagine that an investment into data that showed
inferior performance of a product would serve as a disincen-
tive for our industry partners to heavily invest in this concept.
   As detailed elsewhere in this textbook, SAGES has been the
leader in the prevention of bile duct injuries (BDI), and as
such, the concept of a cholecystectomy registry was explored in
depth, led by the SAGES Quality, Outcomes, and Safety
Committee. This review spanned 2 years and even led to a for-
mal meeting with SAGES leadership and a data company in
2016. The conclusion from this exploration was that there were
two major barriers to creating a SAGES data registry: cost and
the human cost of data entry. A registry tracking cholecystec-
tomy outcomes (with the aim of prevention of BDI) would
require granular data collection, and as such, the surgeons
themselves would most likely have to be the inputters of data.
Given how ubiquitous cholecystectomy is in the general surgi-
cal world, this would impose significant work burden onto
surgeons with little tangible benefit (e.g., this would not have
been required by CMS for reimbursement). As such, there was
concern about how well utilized such a registry would have
been, and without a high percentage of usage, there was a like-
lihood that cases with BDI might not have been entered (with
acknowledged concern for inducing medicolegal risk) – thus
nullifying the value of such a registry. Again, the AHSQC had
initial success because a highly motivated group of academic
surgeons with a career focus on hernia surgery committed to
the laborious task of data entry, but there was skepticism that
surgeons would be similarly motivated with cholecystectomy.
Further, the cost of creating the registry would have been
between $1.5 and 2 million, which is exorbitant and beyond the
realistic ability for a society to fund; data maintenance and
storage over time would also have been well over $1 million.
As such, the registry plans were abandoned.
   Further, SAGES explored the concept – and remains inter-
ested in – tracking outcomes of anti-reflux surgery. While this
would have been less populated than cholecystectomy in terms
102    B. M. Zosa and A. O. Lidor

of case volumes, we postulated that this would be of high inter-
est to the foregut surgeons that comprise a significant percent-
age of SAGES’ membership. While we pivoted away from a
pure data registry due to the aforementioned reasons, a project
to conduct video-based assessments of fundoplications is
underway and may ultimately serve as a data repository for
SAGES members to access. It is the hope of the group conduct-
ing this work that we can all learn from one another in terms
of technical pearls and that over time this will serve to improve
outcomes of the procedure. Much work remains until this is
commonplace among SAGES members, but with the ever-­
increasing computing power and advanced video capture sys-
tems and cloud technology, this may become a “twenty-first
century” data registry that can be accessed for continual qual-
ity improvement.


References
 1. Donabedian A. The quality of care. How can it be assessed?
    JAMA [Internet]. 1988;260(12):1743–8.
 2. Chang V, Blackwell RH, Markossian T, Yau RM, Blanco BA, Zapf
    MAC, et al. Discordance between surgical care improvement
    project adherence and postoperative outcomes: implications for
    new Joint Commission standards. J Surg Res. 2017;212:205–13.
 3. Altom LK, Deierhoi RJ, Grams J, Richman JS, Vick CC,
    Henderson WG, et al. Association between Surgical Care
    Improvement Program venous thromboembolism measures and
    postoperative events. Am J Surg. 2012;204(5):591–7.
 4. Kouchoukos NT, Ebert PA, Grover FL, Lindesmith GG. Report
    of the Ad Hoc Committee on risk factors for coronary artery
    bypass surgery. Ann Thorac Surg [Internet]. 1988;45(3):348–9.
 5. Clark RE. It is time for a national cardiothoracic surgical data
    base. Ann Thorac Surg [Internet]. 1989;48(6):755–6.
 6. Khuri SF, Daley J, Henderson W, Hur K, Gibbs JO, Barbour G,
    et al. Risk adjustment of the postoperative mortality rate for the
    comparative assessment of the quality of surgical care: results of
    the National Veterans Affairs surgical risk study. J Am Coll Surg.
    1997;185(4):325–38.
             Chapter 6. Tracking Quality: Data Registries        103

 7. Khuri SF, Daley J, Henderson W, Hur K, Demakis J, Aust JB,
    et al. The Department of Veterans Affairs’ NSQIP: the first
    national, validated, outcome-based, risk-adjusted, and peer-­
    controlled program for the measurement and enhancement of
    the quality of surgical care. Ann Surg. 1998;228(4):491–507.
 8. Khuri SF. The NSQIP: a new frontier in surgery. Surgery.
    2005;138(5):837–43.
 9. Khuri SF, Henderson WG, Daley J, Jonasson O, Jones RS,
    Campbell DA, et al. Successful implementation of the depart-
    ment of Veterans Affairs’ national surgical quality improvement
    program in the private sector: the patient safety in surgery study.
    Ann Surg. 2008;248(2):329–36.
10. Hall BL, Hamilton BH, Richards K, Bilimoria KY, Cohen
    ME, Ko CY. Does surgical quality improve in the American
    College of Surgeons national surgical quality improvement
    program: an evaluation of all participating hospitals. Ann Surg.
    2009;250(3):363–74.
11. Cohen ME, Liu Y, Ko CY, Hall BL. Improved surgical out-
    comes for ACS NSQIP hospitals over time: evaluation of
    hospital cohorts with up to 8 years of participation. Ann Surg.
    2016;263(2):267–73.
12. Osborne NH, Nicholas LH, Ryan AM, Thumma JR, Dimick
    JB. Association of hospital participation in a quality reporting
    program with surgical outcomes and expenditures for medicare
    beneficiaries. JAMA J Am Med Assoc. 2015;313(5):496–504.
13. Etzioni DA, Wasif N, Dueck AC, Cima RR, Hohmann SF,
    Naessens JM, et al. Association of hospital participation in a
    surgical outcomes monitoring program with inpatient complica-
    tions and mortality. JAMA [Internet]. 2015;313(5):505–11.
14. Fuchshuber PR, Greif W, Tidwell CR, Klemm MS, Frydel C,
    Wali A, et al. The power of the National Surgical Quality
    Improvement Program--achieving a zero pneumonia rate in
    general surgery patients. Perm J. 2012;16(1):39–45.
15. Cima R, Dankbar E, Lovely J, Pendlimari R, Aronhalt K,
    Nehring S, et al. Colorectal surgery surgical site infection reduc-
    tion program: a national surgical quality improvement program-­
    driven multidisciplinary single-institution experience. J Am Coll
    Surg [Internet]. 2013;216(1):23–33.
16. Lutfiyya W, Parsons D, Breen J. A colorectal “care bundle” to
    reduce surgical site infections in colorectal surgeries: a single-­
    center experience. Perm J. 2012;16(3):10–6.
104    B. M. Zosa and A. O. Lidor

17. Thanh NX, Baron T, Litvinchuk S. An economic evaluation of
    the National Surgical Quality Improvement Program (NSQIP)
    in Alberta, Canada. Ann Surg. 2019;269(5):866–72.
18. Campbell DA, Englesbe MJ, Kubus JJ, Phillips LRS, Shanley
    CJ, Velanovich V, et al. Accelerating the pace of surgical quality
    improvement: the power of hospital collaboration. Arch Surg
    (Chicago, Ill: 1960) [Internet]. 2010;145(10):985–91.
19. Guillamondegui OD, Gunter OL, Hines L, Martin BJ, Gibson
    W, Clarke PC, et al. Using the national surgical quality improve-
    ment program and the Tennessee surgical quality collaborative
    to improve surgical outcomes. J Am College Surg [Internet].
    2012;214(4):709–14; discussion 714-6.
20. Hollenbeak CS, Boltz MM, Wang L, Schubart J, Ortenzi G, Zhu J,
    et al. Cost-effectiveness of the national surgical quality improve-
    ment program. Ann Surg. 2011;254(4):619–24.
21. McNelis J, Castaldi M. “The National Surgery Quality
    Improvement Project” (NSQIP): a new tool to increase patient
    safety and cost efficiency in a surgical intensive care unit. Patient
    Saf Surg [Internet]. 2014;8:19.
22. van Katwyk S, Thavorn K, Coyle D, Moloo H, Forster AJ,
    Jackson T, et al. The return of investment of hospital-based surgi-
    cal quality improvement programs in reducing surgical site infec-
    tion at a Canadian tertiary-care hospital. Infect Control Hospital
    Epidemiol [Internet]. 2019;40(2):125–32.
23. Nimeri AA, Bautista J, Philip R. Reducing healthcare costs using
    ACS NSQIP-driven quality improvement projects: a success
    story from Sheikh Khalifa Medical City (SKMC). World J Surg
    [Internet]. 2019;43(2):331–8.
24. Morton J. The first metabolic and bariatric surgery accreditation
    and quality improvement program quality initiative: decreasing
    readmissions through opportunities provided. Surg Obes Relat
    Dis. 2014;10(3):377–8.
25. Brethauer SA, Grieco A, Fraker T, Evans-Labok K, Smith A,
    McEvoy MD, et al. Employing enhanced recovery goals in bar-
    iatric surgery (ENERGY): a national quality improvement proj-
    ect using the metabolic and bariatric surgery accreditation and
    quality improvement program. Surg Obes Relat Dis [Internet].
    2019;15(11):1977–89.
26. Clapp B, Harper B, Barrientes A, Wicker E, Alvara C, Tyroch
    A. The MBSAQIP is going viral! 194 hits and still going strong.
    Surg Obes Relat Dis [Internet]. 2020;16(10):1401–6.
             Chapter 6. Tracking Quality: Data Registries       105

27. Demeusy A, Sill A, Averbach A. Current role of staple line
    reinforcement in 30-day outcomes of primary laparoscopic
    sleeve gastrectomy: an analysis of MBSAQIP data, 2015–2016
    PUF. Surg Obes Relat Dis [Internet]. 2018;14(10):1454–61.
28. Berger ER, Clements RH, Morton JM, Huffman KM, Wolfe
    BM, Nguyen NT, et al. The impact of different surgical tech-
    niques on outcomes in laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomies: the
    first report from the metabolic and bariatric surgery accredita-
    tion and quality improvement program (MBSAQIP). Ann Surg.
    2016;264(3):464–71.
29. Noyes K, Myneni AA, Schwaitzberg SD, Hoffman AB. Quality
    of MBSAQIP data: bad luck, or lack of QA plan? Surg Endosc.
    2020;34(2):973–80.
30. Poulose BK, Roll S, Murphy JW, Matthews BD, Todd Heniford
    B, Voeller G, et al. Design and implementation of the Americas
    Hernia Society Quality Collaborative (AHSQC): improving
    value in hernia care. Hernia. 2016;20(2):177–89.
31. Sahoo S, Haskins IN, Huang LC, Krpata DM, Derwin KA,
    Poulose BK, et al. Early wound morbidity after open ventral
    hernia repair with biosynthetic or polypropylene mesh. J Am
    Coll Surg. 2017;225(4):472–480.e1.
32. Zolin SJ, Petro CC, Prabhu AS, Fafaj A, Thomas JD, Horne CM,
    et al. Registry-based randomized controlled trials: a new para-
    digm for surgical research. J Surg Res. 2020;255:428–35.
33. Petro CC, Zolin S, Krpata D, Alkhatib H, Tu C, Rosen MJ, et al.
    Patient-reported outcomes of robotic vs laparoscopic ventral
    hernia repair with intraperitoneal mesh. JAMA Surg [Internet].
    2021;156:22–9.
34. ABS practice improvement resources [Internet]. Available from:
    https://www.absurgery.org/default.jsp?exam-­mocpa.
Chapter 7
Accreditation Standards:
Bariatric Surgery
Teresa L. LaMasters, Jamie P. Loggins, and Teresa Fraker




Accreditation Standards: Bariatric Surgery
The objectives for this chapter:
1. To describe how accreditation standards were developed
   and implemented across most of North America with wide
   acceptance
2. To review current standards for bariatric accreditation
3. To discuss some of the published data as a result of
   MBSAQIP


T. L. LaMasters (*)
Iowa Methodist Medical Center Unity Point Clinic,
University of Iowa, Des Moines, IA, USA
J. P. Loggins
Mission Weight Management Center, Asheville, NC, USA
T. Fraker
Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery Accreditation and Quality
Improvement Program (MBSAQIP), Division of Research and
Optimal Patient Care (DROPC), American College of Surgeons
(ACS), Chicago, IL, USA
e-mail: teresa@obesitymedicine.org

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature   107
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_7
108   T. L. LaMasters et al.

Development of Accreditation Standards
The era of organized bariatric surgery began around 1967
with collaborative meetings and discussion prior to the for-
mation of what would become the American Society for
Bariatric Surgery (ASBS). The ASBS was officially founded
in 1984 by Dr. Edward Mason at the University of Iowa, and
it would later change its name to become what we now know
as the American Society for Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery
(ASMBS). Even early in the history of bariatric surgery, a
need for data collection and evaluation was identified, and
therefore the first attempt at a database to better understand
outcomes and improve quality was started by Dr. Mason. This
registry was housed at the University of Iowa and was called
the International Bariatric Surgery Registry. The data collec-
tion for this registry began in 1985. It was initially funded by
industry support with a planned transition to eventually be
supported by member surgeons. This database operated by
providing reports to the participating surgeons twice yearly
until the database was eventually closed due to a lack of
funding [1].
   During a similar timeframe, the American College of
Surgeons (ACS) with the missions of education and quality
had partnered with the surgical specialties of trauma and
cancer by forming the Committee on Trauma in 1976 to begin
accreditation programs focused on data and improving
quality.
   There was a period of rapid growth in the number of bar-
iatric procedures performed in the United States with the
emergence of laparoscopic techniques of bariatric surgery
between 1999 and 2003. The number of gastrointestinal sur-
geries performed annually for severe obesity increased from
about 16,000 in the early 1990s to about 103,000 in 2003
(Fig. 7.1) [2, 3].
   During this timeframe, there were many general surgeons
looking to transition from open to laparoscopic approaches
to procedures inclusive of laparoscopic bariatric surgery.
During this period of rapid growth, there were surgeons
                                                   Chapter 7.             Accreditation Standards: Bariatric Surgery                        109

                                                  110,000
No. of Bariatric Surgeries in the United States



                                                  100,000

                                                   90,000

                                                   80,000

                                                   70,000

                                                   60,000

                                                   50,000

                                                   40,000

                                                   30,000

                                                   20,000

                                                   10,000

                                                       0
                                                            1992   1993     1994   1995   1996   1997    1998   1999   2000   2001   2002   2003
                                                                                                  Year



Figure 7.1 Historical annual weight loss surgery volume

providing bariatric surgery with limited training in these com-
plex techniques with limited patient education and program-
matic support. There was a spotlight on poor bariatric surgery
outcomes from many directions including payors, media,
malpractice attorneys, and stigmatism from other medical
professionals. There were also several reports published dur-
ing this period demonstrating a high mortality rate of 2–3%
and high complication rates, particularly in patients over age
65 years of age [4–6].
   A crisis developed when the Centers for Medicare &
Medicaid Services (CMS) considered ceasing coverage for all
bariatric procedures due to high mortality and complications
from bariatric surgery. The Medical Care Advisory Committee
for CMS (MEDCAC) committee met on November 4, 2004,
to consider the concerning outcomes with bariatric surgery.
   The culmination of these reports resulted in a noncover-
age proposal for bariatric surgery for patients 65 years or
older from Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS)
on November 23, 2005; however, CMS continued to collect
and review safety and outcome data on metabolic and bariat-
ric surgery patients. Fortunately, the rigorous focus from the
bariatric surgery community to quality and patient safety did
not go unnoticed by CMS. After care review of additional
information, CMS granted coverage for all Medicare
110   T. L. LaMasters et al.

beneficiaries through a National Coverage Determination
(NCD) in 2006 who met certain criteria provided the
patient’s surgery was performed at a certified Bariatric
Surgery Center of Excellence or a Level 1 Bariatric Surgery
Center [7].
   It was important for the field of bariatric surgery to pivot
from unbridled innovation and growth to one of quality out-
comes and quality improvement.
   Beginning in 2004 and 2005, the first attempt at develop-
ing an accreditation program guided by bariatric surgery
standards was formed, and as a result, two accreditation pro-
grams were developed. One program was under the leader-
ship of the American Society for Metabolic and Bariatric
Surgery (ASMBS), and a second was under the leadership of
the American College of Surgeons (ACS). Both programs
were organized around standards to decrease the variability
in care of bariatric surgery patients. There were, however, dif-
ferent philosophies guiding these efforts. The ASMBS pro-
gram was developed with the creation of a third-party
not-for-profit organization to perform the accreditation
duties and have the specialty society surgeons at arm’s length
from the program. The rationale for having a third party
involved was to ensure that the data integrity could be pro-
tected while simultaneously providing external stakeholders
confidence in the process. The ACS program philosophy cen-
tered on the expertise of the specialty society determining
what constitutes quality in the field without the need for a
third-party entity. There was concern from the ACS of a third
party having interests that did not align with the mission and
goals of the society.
   The ASMBS program was called the Bariatric Surgery
Centers of Excellence (BSCOE) program, run by the Surgical
Review Corporation (SRC). The BSCOE was organized
around ten standards, and it provided verification of the sur-
geon, the practice, and the hospital. The purpose was to create
a means for the public and other interested parties to identify
bariatric surgery programs that provided standardized and
comprehensive care as well as lifelong follow-up care for
    Chapter 7.   Accreditation Standards: Bariatric Surgery     111

patients. Data collection and routine reporting of outcomes
would allow for evaluation of the true risks and benefits of
bariatric surgery while additionally challenging poorly per-
forming programs to evaluate and improve their standards,
education, and training [8].
   In February 2005, the ACS Board of Regents voted to
expand the accreditation programs available with a priority
for bariatric surgery. The focus included the need to develop
established standards, provide reliable outcomes data,
develop a verification process for hospitals and facilities, and
to establish credentialing criteria for surgeons. The ACS
Bariatric Surgery Center Network (ASC BSCN) convened
for planning on March 4, 2005, with 13 bariatric surgeons and
outcomes researchers, and the program was formally launched
in May 2005.
   The initial structure of the ACS BSCN accreditation pro-
gram (Table 7.1) was modeled off the ACS’ trauma verification
program with a Level I and Level II designation primarily
based around surgical case volumes, services available at facility,
and risk profile of patients. It also included a robust data collec-
tion platform modeled from the National Surgical Quality
Improvement Program (NSQIP) with the notable exception
being the increased data capture to 100% data collection (the
NSQIP program required a sampling of 25% data collection).
Data collection was performed by trained surgical clinical
reviewers (SCRs). Bariatric specific endpoints were included as
well as long-term follow-up data at 30 days, 6 months, and annu-
ally thereafter. The data collection system was developed for
quality assessment and quality improvement.
   These accreditations became valuable commercially as
many insurance payors required participation in one of these
two programs. The early results of these accreditation pro-
grams resulted in a 1/3 reduction of those (previous) pro-
grams who were performing bariatric procedures. There was
a sharp and dramatic improvement in mortality and other
serious complications in bariatric surgery. These factors led to
widespread adoption of the accreditation process because of
the significant improvement in patient outcomes.
112    T. L. LaMasters et al.

Table 7.1 Initial criteria for Level 1 and Level 2 BSN
                                     Level 2 = lower volume and
Level 1                              acuity of patients
125 cases per year                   25 cases per year
Two surgeons (at least 50 cases    Surgeon, at least 50 cases every
per year each)                     2 years
Can operate on all patients and    Cannot operate on high-risk
risk levels of patients            patients including:
                                   Age > 60
                                   Significant cardiac or
                                   pulmonary issues
                                   Male BMI >55, female BMI
                                   >60
                                   Nonambulatory patient
                                   Elective revisional operations
Full spectrum of services at
hospital
Significant hospital resources
criteria


   As time progressed, there were flaws identified in the pro-
grams, however. There was a strong emphasis on process and
structure but less focus on outcomes. In particular, the
ASMBS BSCOE program was exclusionary in nature, based
primarily on processes and structure that were not always
attributed to improved patient outcomes. It became difficult
to determine those programs who were high versus poorly
performing based on the data provided for accredited pro-
grams. The data collected as a part of the BSCOE in the
Bariatric Outcomes Longitudinal Database (BOLD) was
extensive but not easily accessible by the participating sur-
geons and programs. The reporting of the data was not ade-
quate to promote or support quality improvement at the local
individual program level.
   The flaws in the program and concerns around limitation
of access to care for bariatric patients led to the development
of a third system, the Michigan Bariatric Surgery Collaborative
   Chapter 7.   Accreditation Standards: Bariatric Surgery   113

(MBSC). This collaborative was focused on high participa-
tion, with high-quality data, and sharing of best practices in a
collaborative effort. The goal was that all programs in
Michigan were expected to participate with the principle of
“a rising tide lifts all boats.” By encouraging all programs to
participate, they were able to improve quality of all programs
versus excluding programs. The MBSC was funded by a com-
mercial insurance company – Blue Cross Blue Shield
(BCBS) – that served 47% of all patients in Michigan. The
collaborative was independent of the insurance company
other than receiving funding to operate the collaborative.
BCBS also provided insurance coverage for those patients
receiving bariatric surgery at participating programs even if
the programs did not participate in the ASMBS or ACS
accreditation programs. The MBSC was able to demonstrate
improved outcomes for the participating bariatric programs,
which were similar to, or even better than, programs partici-
pating in the other accreditation programs, due to the collab-
orative focus [9–12].
   In response to the MBSC findings, CMS dropped the
requirement for its beneficiaries to have bariatric surgery in
an accredited facility [13].
   During this timeframe, it became clear that the ASMBS
BSCOE needed to evolve. There was concern that the third-­
party organization in charge of the accreditation process may
not be aligned with the goals of the ASMBS organization and
their leadership. Conflict began to arise, and despite attempts
to mitigate the concerns of the organization, it was deter-
mined that a new path must be forged to reach the goals of
continued quality improvement. The SRC (aka the third
party) gave notice to ASMBS that it was not interested in a
collaboration of efforts, and the SRC then planned to start
their own Centers of Excellence program for bariatric sur-
gery independent of ASMBS. The ASMBS’s contract with the
SRC was terminated on April 1, 2012 [14].
   The combination of these events led to collaboration
between the ASMBS and the ACS to create one unified
accreditation program and credentialing guidelines. This
114   T. L. LaMasters et al.

process began in 2011 and continued through 2012. Initially
there were differences between the programs, and a large
undertaking to merge the cultures of the program was under-
taken. Members of each society came together to create the
new accreditation program modeled similarly under the pre-
vious ACS BSCN program and other quality programs such
as NSQIP. Three working committees were formed which
included standards, verification, and data. There was also an
oversight committee for governance of the program, called
the Committee for Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery. The ini-
tial standards were released for public comment in December
of 2012. There was a large response from the membership,
and these comments were then integrated into the standards.
A second draft of the standards was proposed in 2013 with
additional comments. The program merged the data collec-
tion into the BSCN database with programs beginning to
enter new data for the new accreditation program of the
Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery Accreditation and Quality
Improvement Program (MBSAQIP) on March 1, 2012. The
first official set of standards for the new accreditation pro-
gram MBSAQIP were published on January 28, 2014, in the
Resources for the Optimal Care of the Metabolic and Bariatric
Surgery Patient 2014: MBSAQIP Standards and Pathways
Manual [14].
    The key aspects of the new program centered around local
committees in metabolic and bariatric surgery to evaluate the
risk adjusted data and the requirement that the accredited
centers use this data for quality improvement. It includes sup-
port for integrated health team members to provide educa-
tion and support within a program structure, data abstraction
by independent and trained clinical reviewers, requirement
for at least one verified surgeon at the center, and integration
of adolescent bariatric surgery standards. The new program
provided accreditation for the hospitals and facilities with the
requirement that the hospital and facilities demonstrate both
the fiscal and administrative support for the program.
    The focus of the MBSAQIP is the use of valid, high-quality
data provided to individual programs with risk-adjusted
   Chapter 7.   Accreditation Standards: Bariatric Surgery    115

reports to allow for individual programs to use the data for
continuous quality improvements. Programs are provided
reports on individual outcomes as well as comparison data
against benchmarks from patients with a similar risk profile.
The structure and process of the bariatric programs center
around evidence-based and consensus-based standards.
Participating programs receive site visits and feedback on
compliance with the standards as well as input regarding
areas and strategies for quality improvement. MBSAQIP cur-
rently has over 839 centers participating in the program, and
this number grows each year [15].
   The standards are reviewed and updated continuously
with new standards published on a triennial cycle. The
Standards and Verification committee reviews the standards
in lieu of new published evidence, feedback from site review-
ers, and feedback from participating programs. Currently, the
third edition of the standards in the Resources for the Optimal
Care of the Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery Patient: 2019
Standards is used to measure programs against one another.
This version of the standards is organized under eight sepa-
rate standards, thereby creating alignment across ACS’ entire
suite of quality programs in the Division of Research and
Optimal Patient Care (DROPC), the ACS’ quality division.
There are additional qualifications available in Adolescent
Bariatric Surgery and Obesity Medicine for programs who
meet the additional requirements. The MBSAQIP has
remained innovative in response to change and new chal-
lenges. In late 2019 and throughout 2020, the United States
and the world suffered with a global pandemic of the SARS-­
CoV-­2 coronavirus pandemic with the disease of COVID-19
greatly restricting the ability for in-person site visits and col-
laboration. Like many organizations during this trying time,
the MBSAQIP adapted to this new environment. In collabo-
ration with the other accreditation programs in DROPC, it
developed a standardized virtual site visit that was imple-
mented in the summer of 2020. The focus was still on verifica-
tion of compliance with standards and implementation of
continuous quality improvement based on data from the
116   T. L. LaMasters et al.

MBSAQIP risk-adjusted reports. The initial virtual visits
were performed with centers applying for renewal of accredi-
tation and subsequently included sites seeking initial
accreditation.


Current Standards for Bariatric Accreditation
The current standards allow programs to participate even
when the program is new and early in their experience with
bariatric surgery. There are different accreditation pathways
depending on the volume, experience, and goals of the center.
The accreditation pathways available include Data Collection
Center, MBSAQIP Comprehensive Center, MBSAQIP
Comprehensive Center with Adolescent Qualifications,
MBSAQIP Comprehensive Center with Obesity Medicine
Qualifications, MBSAQIP Comprehensive Center with
Adolescent and Obesity Medicine Qualifications, MBSAQIP
Low Acuity Center, MBSAQIP Adolescent Center, and
MBSAQIP Ambulatory Surgery Center.
  We will give a brief overview of the current standards with a
summary of the goal and rationale of the standard (Fig. 7.2) [16].


 tandard 1: Institutional Administrative
S
Commitment

• 1.1 Administrative Commitment

   This standard is focused on the component of required
institutional support for the program. It will not be possible
for the metabolic and bariatric program to be successful pro-
viding high-quality outcomes with implementation of the
standards without strong institutional commitment and sup-
port. This support is demonstrated in many ways including
infrastructure and cultural support. It requires a signed writ-
ten commitment from the highest institutional leadership.
   Chapter 7.   Accreditation Standards: Bariatric Surgery   117




Figure 7.2 2019 MBSAQIP Optimal Resources for Surgical Quality
and Safety, or “STANDARDS” 15

   Rationale: Full support and continuous commitment from
institutional leadership is vital to maintaining a MBSAQIP
Accredited Center. Resource allocation (such as equipment,
personnel, and administrative support), a commitment to
patient safety, and an enduring focus on continuous quality
improvement are the hallmarks of strong institutional
­administrative support which help facilitate the success of
 MBSAQIP centers.


Standard 2: Program Scope and Governance

• 2.1 Volume Criteria
• 2.2 Low Acuity Center Patient and Procedure Selection
• 2.3 Ambulatory Surgery Center Patient and Procedure
  Selection
• 2.4 Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery (MBS) Committee
• 2.5 Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery (MBS) Director
• 2.6 Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery (MBS) Coordinator
118   T. L. LaMasters et al.

• 2.7 
      Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery (MBS) Clinical
      Reviewer
• 2.8 Obesity Medicine Director (OMD)

   This standard is the foundation for the accreditation pro-
gram, speaking to volume, patient selection, governance, and
outcome management with high-quality data. It provides
minimum procedure volume requirements as well as patient
and procedure selection for Low Acuity and Ambulatory
Surgery Centers. It also details the composition and responsi-
bilities of the key members for the governance of the accred-
ited programs. This includes the Metabolic and Bariatric
Surgery (MBS) Committee, the MBS Director, the MBS
Coordinator, the MBS Clinical Reviewer, and the Obesity
Medicine Director (OMD) and Pediatric Medical Advisor
(PMA), when applicable.
   The accreditation and quality improvement are focused on
the facility, regardless of how many individual practice loca-
tions or surgeons participate at that facility. There is a single
unified MBS Committee that consists of, at a minimum, the
MBS Director, the MBS Coordinator, the MBS Clinical
Reviewer, all surgeons and proceduralists at the center per-
forming procedures for the treatment of metabolic or obesity-­
related diseases and representatives of the facility
administration who are involved in the care or oversight of
metabolic and bariatric patients. The cooperation and ­support
of the facility administration is key to the success of a high-
quality program with a culture of continuous quality improve-
ment and patient safety.
   The MBS Committee is the primary forum for ensuring
continuous quality improvement. The MBS Committee is a
confidential setting for which the team can share best prac-
tices, respond to adverse events, and foster a culture to
improve patient care. There must be consensus around care
pathways and protocols with a focus on consistency and reli-
able delivery of intended care. One of the most important
aspects of quality improvement is to decrease variability. The
consistency of a process is key to supporting continued qual-
ity and process improvement.
   Chapter 7.   Accreditation Standards: Bariatric Surgery   119

    The MBS Director holds significant responsibility and
authority for the leadership of the program. The MBS
Director chairs the MBS Committee and is responsible in
conjunction with the MBS Committee, to overseeing every
aspect of the program. This includes the accreditation process
and ensuring continuous compliance with MBSAQIP stan-
dards, outcomes and data collection, and development of
quality improvement initiatives and quality standards. It also
includes education of staff, patient selection and exclusion
criteria, the process to safely introduce emerging technolo-
gies, institution-wide communication of MBS-related policies,
and reporting ethical and quality deviations with plans to
remediate or limit privileges. The institution’s organizational
framework must incorporate the MBS Director position and
have a contract or a job description in place that provides the
authority and resources to fulfill the required duties. The
MBS Director is assisted in their duties by the MBS
Coordinator and the MBS Clinical Reviewer.
    The center must have a designated MBS Coordinator. The
MBS Coordinator works directly with the MBS Director and
assists in overseeing all aspects of the program. This includes
assistance with program development, managing the accredi-
tation process, maintaining pathways and protocols, patient
education, monitoring outcomes data and collection, and
education of staff with a focus on patient safety. The MBS
Coordinator serves as the liaison between the center and the
MBSAQIP and as additionally acts as the liaison between the
center and all metabolic and bariatric surgeons, procedural-
ists, and any general surgeons providing call coverage.
    Quality improvement and monitoring of patient safety
require timely and accurate data entry and management. This
is the responsibility of the MBS Clinical Reviewer (MBSCR).
The MBSCR completes specific training on data abstraction
and management that includes ongoing recertification. The
MBS Clinical Reviewer performs data abstraction on all
patients undergoing metabolic and bariatric procedures
including the entry of long-term follow-up data for all
patients. The MBSAQIP is unique among many accreditation
120   T. L. LaMasters et al.

programs in the requirement of 100% data capture rather
than a sampling of data. To provide high-quality, prospec-
tively collected clinical data, the data abstraction is per-
formed following objective definitions by an individual who
is not providing direct patient care or charting in the patient’s
medical record. The MBSCR must be integrated with the
organizational framework and is a key participant in the
quality improvement process with data management and
application of the data to specific quality improvement
projects.
    Rationale: All MBSAQIP-accredited centers must main-
tain sufficient annual case volume based on their designation
level. Additionally, accredited centers must follow any patient
and procedure selection criteria specific to their designation
level.
    Every metabolic and bariatric procedure performed for
the treatment of metabolic or obesity-related diseases at a
MBSAQIP-accredited center must be entered into the
MBSAQIP Registry.
    The facility and medical staff provide the structure, pro-
cess, and personnel to obtain and maintain the quality stan-
dards of the MBSAQIP in caring for metabolic and bariatric
patients. The administrative and medical staff must commit to
broad cooperation to improve the quality of metabolic and
bariatric patient care provided at the center.


Standard 3: Facilities and Equipment Resources

• 3.1 Health Care Facility Accreditation
• 3.2 Facilities, Equipment, and Furniture
• 3.3 Designated Bariatric Unit

   This standard requires appropriate equipment and facility
accommodations for the care of metabolic and bariatric
patients. The increased awareness of the needs of the meta-
bolic and bariatric patient population can improve the quality
   Chapter 7.   Accreditation Standards: Bariatric Surgery   121

of care for patients of increased size that are encountered
throughout a facility in many different departments. This
standard also requires a designated area for care of the meta-
bolic and bariatric patient. The designated unit can achieve a
higher level of consistency and reliability in care delivery in
the program with specific pathways and care protocols. It
allows for focused training of staff and more rapid quality and
process improvement with a close working relationship with
the MBS Director and MBS Coordinator.
   Rationale: The center must maintain appropriate facilities
and equipment for the care of metabolic and bariatric
patients. This includes furniture, wheelchairs, operating room
tables, appropriately weight-rated or reinforced toilets, beds,
radiology capabilities, surgical instruments, and necessary
facility requirements for the safe delivery of care to patients
with obesity.


Standard 4: Personnel and Services Resources

• 4.1 Credentialing Guidelines for Metabolic and Bariatric
  Surgeons
• 4.2 MBSAQIP Surgeon Verification
• 4.3 Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery Call Coverage
• 4.4 Staff Training
• 4.5 Multidisciplinary Team
• 4.6 Advanced Cardiovascular Life Support (ACLS)
• 4.7 Patient Stabilization
• 4.8 Critical Care Unit (CCU)/Intensive Care Unit (ICU)
  Services
• 4.9 Anesthesia Services
• 4.10 Endoscopy Services
• 4.11 Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology Services
• 4.12 Specialty Services
• 4.13 Pediatric Medical Advisor (PMA)
• 4.14 Pediatric Behavioral Specialist
• 4.15 Children’s Hospital Service Requirements
122   T. L. LaMasters et al.

    This standard requires centers that are providing meta-
bolic and bariatric procedures to have appropriate personnel,
resources, and structure to care for and support those patients
throughout the continuum of care. It also provides the unified
guidelines for all major organizations for the credentialing of
metabolic and bariatric surgeons.
    Metabolic and bariatric surgery is one of the greatest suc-
cess stories in quality improvement. A significant contribu-
tion to the improvement of quality over the past 15 years is
related to ensuring the initial treating center has the appro-
priate facility infrastructure, staff training, and multidisci-
plinary teams in place to avoid adverse outcomes when
possible and intervene early should adverse events occur. The
center must be prepared for early recognition and interven-
tion for any adverse events in the metabolic and bariatric
patient population for both acute and chronic issues that
could arise. It is the responsibility of the MBS Director with
the MBS Committee to select those patients who are felt to
be appropriate for the resources available at the facility with
the intention that the accredited center is able to provide for
any patient needs. A transfer agreement may be used for
unusual events to assist with the care of a patient; however,
the transfer agreement is not to be used as a part of standard
care pathways for management of common expected or fore-
seeable adverse events. Specialized staff training around the
topics of sensitivity training, safe patient transfer and mobili-
zation, and recognition of signs and symptoms of postopera-
tive complications are key to developing a culture of patient
safety. This training provides the team with the necessary
educational tools for which to identify those patients who
may be experiencing complications and to additionally iden-
tify those clinical signs and symptoms which may lead to a
failure to rescue.
    Rationale: If metabolic and bariatric patients require criti-
cal care services, centers and their associated surgeons must
ensure that patients receive appropriate care. The facility
must maintain various on-site and consultative services
required for the care of metabolic and bariatric patients,
   Chapter 7.   Accreditation Standards: Bariatric Surgery   123

including the immediate on-site availability of personnel
capable of administering advanced cardiovascular life sup-
port. Consultants must be available within the specified time
as determined by institutional policy.
   The responsibility is upon the center, the metabolic and
bariatric surgeon, and ultimately the MBS Committee and
MBS Director, to appropriately select patients and develop
selection criteria for the center relative to the center’s avail-
able resources and experience. For example, patients who are
at risk for specific and predictable complications (renal fail-
ure, airway compromise, heart failure, etc.) must be managed
in a facility where access to all reasonable medical subspe-
cialty care is available.
   All MBSAQIP Comprehensive Center designations must
be able to provide CCU and/or ICU services, endoscopy ser-
vices, and diagnostic and interventional radiology services
on-site (some additional specialty services may be provided
through a transfer agreement). Centers accredited under less
than Comprehensive Center designation levels are eligible to
provide these services either on-site or through a transfer
agreement.
   This standard includes credentialing guidelines for meta-
bolic and bariatric surgeons, criteria for MBSAQIP surgeon
verification, outline for metabolic and bariatric surgery call
coverage, and requirement for staff training in specific areas
on the topics previously mentioned including sensitivity train-
ing, patient transfer and mobilization, and signs and symptoms
of postoperative complications. There is an emphasis on early
recognition and intervention for adverse events to avoid more
severe cascades of complications. It also includes a require-
ment for dedicated multidisciplinary teams including consis-
tent operating room teams. The multidisciplinary team is
critical for the diverse background of skills and knowledge to
best care for patients with the chronic and life-threatening
disease of obesity. The consistency these teams contribute to
reliability of care delivered is the foundation for high-quality
care.
124    T. L. LaMasters et al.

   This standard also outlines specialty services to be pro-
vided and includes additional criteria for adolescent centers
and comprehensive accredited centers with adolescent
qualifications.


 tandard 5: Patient Care – Expectations
S
and Protocol
•   5.1 Patient Education Pathways
•   5.2 Patient Care Pathways
•   5.3 Written Transfer Agreement
•   5.4 Inpatient Admitting Privileges
•   5.5. Risk Assessment Protocol
•   5.6 Obesity Medicine Services

   This standard outlines the requirement of approved path-
ways and protocols for care of metabolic and bariatric
patients at the center. The consistency of the care allows for
identification of barriers and areas for which to focus on
quality or process improvement. This standard addresses the
requirement for surgeons performing metabolic and bariatric
procedures at ambulatory surgery centers (ASCs) to have
admitting privileges at an inpatient facility to manage the full
range of metabolic and bariatric surgery complications to
ensure the continuity of care for the patient with the operat-
ing surgeon. It also outlines the requirement for ASCs to have
a risk assessment protocol that is reviewed annually, which
can be applied uniformly for patient selection for treating
metabolic and bariatric patients in an outpatient setting.
   Rationale: The center must utilize comprehensive clinical
pathways that facilitate the standardization of patient care
for metabolic and bariatric procedures. Pathways are a
sequence of orders and therapies describing the routine care
for metabolic and bariatric patients from initial evaluation
through long-term follow-up. MBSAQIP requires that patient
care pathways be thoroughly documented and followed
appropriately by both surgeons and advance practice
    Chapter 7.   Accreditation Standards: Bariatric Surgery   125

providers treating metabolic and bariatric patients. Clinical
pathways can be documented in a variety of formats, includ-
ing tables, algorithms, process maps, and paragraph form. All
staff caring for metabolic and bariatric patients must be
aware of the pathways pertinent to their area of practice.
   MBSAQIP Obesity Medicine Qualifications provide an
additional designation level for facilities that offer nonproc-
edural treatment for patients who are overweight and patients
with Class I, II, and III obesity. Centers with Obesity
Medicine Qualifications employ therapeutic interventions
including nutritional intervention, physical activity, behav-
ioral change, and pharmacotherapy. These centers must uti-
lize a comprehensive approach to providing care for patients
with obesity as described in the Obesity Medicine Standards
(Standards 2.8, 5.6, and 6.4), including the use of additional
specialists such as dietitians, exercise specialists, behavioral
health professionals, obesity medicine specialists, advance
practice providers, and bariatric surgeons to achieve optimal
results. Additionally, obesity medicine practitioners function
as an effective resource for providing both pre- and postop-
erative care for metabolic and bariatric patients, while advo-
cating for all patients with obesity.


Standard 6: Data Surveillance and Systems

•   6.1 Data Entry
•   6.2 30-Day and Long-Term Follow-Up
•   6.3 Data Review
•   6.4 Obesity Medicine Data Collection

   This standard addresses the data abstraction requirements
for short-term and long-term follow-up. It also addresses the
requirement for data review with ongoing monitoring of the
data specific to the individual center and the individuals per-
forming metabolic and bariatric procedures at the facility.
The MBSAQIP requires 100% case capture rather than a
sampling of data and provides a high degree of confidence in
126   T. L. LaMasters et al.

the data so that quality improvement decisions and projects
may be developed from the data. It is important that each
center look carefully at the data to understand the story
behind the data and how it may be used to guide quality
improvement. The MBS Director, MBS Clinical Reviewer,
and the MBS Coordinator along with the MBS Committee
work closely to monitor outcomes with both risk- adjusted
reports as well as non-risk-adjusted reports to best under-
stand the local versus national environment for benchmark-
ing purposes. Access to this data allows for efficient cycles of
change and more rapid quality improvement
implementation.
   For centers seeking Obesity Medicine Qualifications, this
standard also includes the requirement for data collection
and outcomes monitoring for obesity medicine patients. This
requirement is performed independently with local level data
management separate from the MBSAQIP data registry. The
data management must include reporting and data analysis.
Data monitoring can allow for tracking patient outcomes and
identification of successful treatment strategies.
   Rationale: High-quality data is critical to inform quality
improvement and measure the performance of metabolic and
bariatric surgery programs.
   All metabolic and bariatric procedures performed for the
treatment of metabolic or obesity-related diseases must be
entered into the MBSAQIP registry, including those per-
formed by nonmetabolic and bariatric surgery credentialed
proceduralists and general surgeons.
   Data collection is ultimately the responsibility of the MBS
Director working collaboratively with the MBS Clinical
reviewer, physician offices, and institutional departments to
ensure accurate short- and long-term results.
   The MBSAQIP Registry collects prospective, risk-adjusted,
clinically rich data based on standardized definitions. Data
variables to be collected are provided via the MBSAQIP
Registry. Data variables are periodically updated, refined,
added, or deleted to optimize the information entered into
the MBSAQIP Registry while minimizing the data collection
burden. Centers are allowed the ability to track additional
   Chapter 7.   Accreditation Standards: Bariatric Surgery   127

data elements as desired using custom fields within the
MBSAQIP Registry.
   Data is validated through multiple mechanisms that are
continuously updated to optimize the quality of the data col-
lected. The MBSAQIP Registry was developed to minimize
the potential to submit inaccurate data as well as prevent
missing data. Centers are required to intermittently submit
administrative or other corroborating data as an audit against
the data entered. Data are validated in a systematic fashion
as part of MBSAQIP site visits. MBS Clinical Reviewers are
trained data reviewers who are not directly involved in
patient care. Ongoing training and assessment of the MBS
Clinical Reviewer’s processes and knowledge are monitored
as another means to validate data entry. Additional data
integrity audits, information, or clarifications may be required
by the MBSAQIP.
   Data is collected at 30 days, 6 months, 1 year, and annually
thereafter. Follow-up data is used to assess morbidity and
mortality, as well as the clinical effectiveness concerning
changes in weight and weight-related comorbidities. Risk-­
adjusted metrics have been developed for quality assessment
and improvement.


Standard 7: Quality Improvement

• 7.1 Adverse Event Monitoring
• 7.2 Quality Improvement Initiatives
• 7.3 Annual Compliance Reports (ACR)

   Patient safety and adverse event monitoring must be
implemented through the MBS Committee led by the MBS
Director. It includes a protocol to notify surgeons and proce-
duralists of adverse events and to discuss the patient’s care
with the MBS Committee when adverse events occur. All
mortalities that occur within the first 90 days postoperatively
or post-procedurally must be reviewed within 60 days of dis-
covery. All outcomes data must be reviewed on a regular
basis.
128   T. L. LaMasters et al.

   To deliver safe, effective, and high-quality care to each
patient, the accredited center must develop a culture of col-
laboration and safety among all MBS Committee members.
Quality improvement (QI) emphasizes a continuous, multi-
disciplinary effort to improve the process of care and its out-
comes. The Semi-Annual Risk Adjusted Report (SAR) is a
risk-adjusted report provided twice annually with compari-
sons of the individual site level to all MBSAQIP-accredited
centers regarding patient complications and outcomes. Each
center must use data from the Semi-Annual Risk Adjusted
Report (SAR) and other data sources to evaluate areas for
improvement. The center must conduct at least one quality
improvement initiative each year approved by the MBS
Committee with oversight and leadership from the MBS
Director. Any center identified as a high outlier on the SAR
must develop a QI initiative designed to address the high
outlier status.
   This standard outlines six basic steps for the basic process
for completing a quality improvement initiative. The steps
include:

1. Review data – SAR, non-risk-adjusted reports, internal
   data
2. Identify the problem – high outlier status, or other areas
   for improvement with a focus on patient safety
3. Propose intervention – discuss contributing factors, root
   cause analysis
4. Choose quality improvement methodology – may use any
   consistent methodology that satisfies their unique needs,
   establish a timeline for review and metrics to track
   progress
5. Implement intervention and monitor data – consistently
   implement the intervention, monitor data, and evaluate
   any missed opportunities of care
6. Present results – gather all documentation and data, review
   progress, summarize the findings and results of the quality
   improvement initiative
    Chapter 7.   Accreditation Standards: Bariatric Surgery   129

   For MBSAQIP centers renewing their accreditation, they
must provide evidence of compliance with the standards each
year by submitting the Annual Compliance Report (ACR).
Triennially, the program will receive a visit with a surgeon site
reviewer in order to ensure compliance with the standards as
well as provide guidance and collaboration on best practices.
   Rationale: Processes for identifying adverse events and
implementing subsequent corrective action plans, measurable
through patient outcomes, are inherent cornerstones of con-
tinuous quality improvement. Problem resolution, outcomes
improvement, and assurances of patient safety (“loop clo-
sure”) must be readily identifiable through structured quality
improvement initiatives.
   In support of these efforts, the MBS Director and the MBS
Committee at each center must develop a culture of collabo-
ration to report, analyze, and implement strategies based on
data to drive improvement in the quality of care offered to
metabolic and bariatric patients. While major quality improve-
ment initiatives such as decreasing surgical site infections,
leaks, or venous thromboembolism prophylaxis are impor-
tant, equally important is the examination of pathways of
care to maximize the patient experience and effectiveness of
metabolic and bariatric procedures. Continuous quality
improvement must be reflected in the results of such efforts
by the MBS Committee.


 tandard 8: Education: Professional
S
and Community Outreach
• 8.1 Support Groups

   Obesity is a chronic, progressive, life-threatening disease
that requires long-term management and support for success-
ful treatment. Support groups can be an important part of
weight maintenance, mental health, provide a community of
support, and be a useful tool to control this chronic disease. All
accredited centers must provide scheduled, structured, and
supervised support groups for metabolic and bariatric patients.
130   T. L. LaMasters et al.

   Rationale: Continuous outreach to metabolic and bariatric
patients through regularly scheduled, organized, and super-
vised support groups is critical for maintaining long-term
patient engagement and success. Support groups create an
environment for both healthcare providers and patients to
offer ongoing education and encouragement.


 pplication of the MBSAQIP Data
A
for Research and Quality Improvement
Thus far, we have explored the history of metabolic and bar-
iatric surgery and reviewed the current standard guidelines
for MBSAQIP accreditation. Next, we would like to take a
look at what a powerful tool the MBSAQIP is for not only
ensuring metabolic and bariatric surgery patients received
reliable quality care but also how this robust data registry can
be used to further our understanding of metabolic and bariat-
ric surgery while continuously improving the care we deliver.
   As was mentioned earlier, one of the most powerful ele-
ments of the MBSAQIP data registry is that accreditation
standards require 100% data capture. This means that data
elements from every metabolic and bariatric surgery per-
formed at every accredited bariatric program must be
reported at designated postsurgical milestones including
30 days, 6 months, and annually thereafter. Another exciting
element of the MBSAQIP program is that this data is made
available at no additional cost, to members of the bariatric
team at each MBSAQIP-participating center. This data is
shared through the Participant Use Data File (PUF). This file
is HIPAA compliant and contains deidentified patient-level
aggregate data. The purpose of this file is to facilitate research
by providing investigators access to this collective pool of
data as a means of improving the quality of care delivered to
metabolic and bariatric surgery patients. In 2019 alone, the
PUF contains data from 206,570 cases performed at 868
MBSAQIP programs. At the time of this writing in total, the
PUF includes data from 967,456 metabolic and bariatric
    Chapter 7.   Accreditation Standards: Bariatric Surgery    131

surgery cases performed since 2015 [17]. This makes the
MBSAQIP PUF an extremely powerful resource for research-
ers looking to study trends and answer clinical questions in
their efforts to advance the quality and safety of metabolic
and bariatric surgery for all patients. To illustrate this, we will
explore some of the important published data that was pos-
sible as a result of the MBSAQIP program.
   As was mentioned earlier, an alarming rise in bariatric sur-
gery morbidity and mortality brought the discipline to a crisis
point which was the trigger for the development of the accred-
itation process. Following implementation of the accreditation
process and the focus on laparoscopic techniques and patient
selection, there was a tenfold reduction in 30-day mortality in
bariatric surgery patients [18]. With this crisis averted, CMS
then turned their attention to readmission rates as an impor-
tant factor escalating medical costs. This led to the first
national MBSAQIP quality improvement project: Decreasing
Readmissions through Opportunities Provided (DROP). The
ambitious goal of this program was to decrease all-cause
30-day readmissions of metabolic and bariatric surgery
patients having surgery at accredited programs by 20% in one
year. MBSAQIP data indicated most readmissions on bariat-
ric surgery patients stemmed from preventable causes such as
dehydration, nausea, medication side effects, and patient
expectations [19]. First vetted by a pilot program out of
Stanford University, this was to be accomplished through a
number of interventions beginning in the presurgical phase
and continuing through the perioperative and postoperative
periods [18]. Between March 2015 and March 2016, DROP
was implemented at 128 MBSAQIP-accredited comprehen-
sive centers. The study followed patients who underwent pri-
mary laparoscopic bariatric surgery including adjustable
gastric banding, sleeve gastrectomy, and Roux-­en-­Y gastric
bypass. The result was a statistically significant decrease in
readmissions by 19% for the laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy
patients, with favorable but not statistically significant reduc-
tions in readmission rates for adjustable gastric band and
gastric bypass patients [20]. While shy of its
132   T. L. LaMasters et al.

ambitious goal, DROP was largely considered a great success
and gave a glimpse as to how this comprehensive data registry
might be used to improve patient experience and outcomes.
   The success of the DROP program quickly gave rise to the
second MBSAQIP national quality improvement project.
This project, Employing New Enhanced Recovery Goals in
Bariatric Surgery (ENERGY), was largely focused on
addressing an issue that was becoming a popular across many
surgical disciplines, namely, postsurgical length of stay (LOS).
The Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS®) movement
had been gaining attention since 2001 largely based on its
potential to improve outcomes and decrease cost. In 2016
guidelines specific for the perioperative care of the bariatric
surgery patient were published by the ERAS society [21].
Bariatric surgery accreditation has always emphasized the
importance of standardized clinical pathways, but the original
purpose for these pathways was more to ensure standardiza-
tion for any given program or hospital. The principals of the
ENERGY initiative involved the use of multicenter stan-
dardized clinical pathways with the goal improving length of
stay for metabolic and bariatric surgery patients. Using the
MBSAQIP data, the authors identified accredited metabolic
and bariatric surgery programs who were considered statisti-
cally significant high outliers for extended length of stay
(ELOS) compared to MBSAQIP benchmarks. Secondary
outcomes studied included bleeding, readmission, and reop-
eration, to ensure that patients were not being discharged
early only to be subsequently readmitted. Seventy-nine such
sites were identified and invited to participate in the program.
Participation required adherence to a rigorous protocol that
focused on concepts such as opioid-sparing pain management
algorithms, goal-directed fluid management, and preopera-
tive nutrition to minimize the effects of insulin resistance.
These measures were implemented across various phases of
care starting prior to patient’s preoperative visit and extended
through discharge. Thirty-six programs ended up participat-
ing in the program which started in 2016 and included a
1-year preintervention comparison period followed by a
   Chapter 7.   Accreditation Standards: Bariatric Surgery   133

1-year implementation period. In all, 18,048 cases were
included in this study. The authors looked at extended length
of stay (ELOS) ≥4 days in the pre- and posttreatment groups,
which were 8.1% and 4.5%, respectively. This was a signifi-
cant decrease in ELOS by almost half between the preinter-
vention and implementation groups. In addition, they did not
observe any increase in readmission, reoperation, or overall
morbidity rates [22]. An interesting finding that was noted
was a slight trend toward higher bleeding rates during the
implementation phase, which is postulated to be secondary to
the opioid-sparing reliance on NSAIDS. This study validated
the feasibility and tremendous benefit of decreasing variabil-
ity of patient care through standardized clinical pathways
across multiple centers, with recommendations that such
clinical pathways be implemented on a larger scale.
   With the lessons learned from the experience of two
national quality improvement projects, the MBSC chose to
address one of the most serious healthcare epidemics in the
United States, the opioid crisis. The experience of the
ENERGY project substantiated the feasibility of opioid-­
sparing protocols in metabolic and bariatric surgery patients,
but there was further inquiry needed regarding opioid stew-
ardship. The burning platform, related to opioid overdoses
with 72,000 American lives lost in 2017 alone, led to the third
nationwide MBSAQIP quality improvement project: Bariatric
Surgery Targeting Opioid Prescriptions (BSTOP) [23]. The
purpose of this project was to develop and implement proto-
cols for reducing opioid prescriptions in those patients under-
going metabolic and bariatric surgery without sacrificing
postoperative analgesia. This project uses clinical pathways
centered around patient education and the implementation
of opioid-sparing pain management strategies including mini-
mizing perioperative opioid use and regional analgesia.
MBSAQIP-accredited centers were invited to participate,
and to be included, programs had to agree to follow clinical
guidelines for multimodal pain control, provide patient edu-
cation, and additional elements of data collection to ensure
agreement by all stakeholders at both the clinical and
134   T. L. LaMasters et al.

administrative levels of each institution. Programs started
onboarding for this ambitious program in June 2019. Similar
to the ENERGY project, there was a 3-month period of pre-­
implementation data collection followed by an 18-month
period of implementation. At the time of this writing, results
from this third national MBSAQIP quality initiative are not
yet known, as this study is ongoing with a planned completion
date of in June 2020, which may have been delayed by the
COVID-19 pandemic. When one considers that regular utili-
zation of prescribed opioids in patients undergoing metabolic
and bariatric surgery who were previously opioid naïve is as
high as 5.8% at 6 months and 14.2% by 7 years postopera-
tively, along with a 1.3% mortality rate from new opioid
dependence, there is potential for BSTOP to prevent twice as
many deaths as the complete elimination of venous thrombo-
embolic events, anastomotic leaks, pneumonia, and bleeding
combined [24].
    These three national quality initiative projects highlight
the power and usefulness of the MBSAQIP data and
MBSAQIP-accredited institutions to implement and study
change on a national scale. Access to MBSAQIP also makes
it a well-built tool to facilitate research at the local/regional
level. One such example includes a study examining predic-
tors and outcomes of leak after Roux-en-Y gastric bypass
(RYGB) through an analysis of the MBSAQIP data registry.
Anastomotic/staple line leak is one of the most dreaded com-
plications of gastric bypass surgery, and fear of leak has led to
the continued search of “safer” procedures. Remarkably,
however, few studies had been published regarding specific
predictors of leak with modern RYGB. Mocanu et al. ana-
lyzed all patients who had RYGB surgery at an accredited
MBSAQIP center between 2015 and 2016 to identify the
prevalence, impact, and predictors of leak in these patients.
The study included 77,596 patients. There were 476 leaks with
an overall leak rate of 0.6% with a leak-mortality rate of
1.5%. They found an overall total complication rate of 7.5%
and a low overall mortality rate of 0.16% in the cohort.
Statistically significant risk factors for leak following RYGB
   Chapter 7.   Accreditation Standards: Bariatric Surgery   135

included excess BMI, age, operative length, American Society
of Anesthesiologist score (ASA) >3, history of a PE, and par-
tially dependent functional status, with the latter two being
the most predictive of leak. Interestingly, the investigators
found albumin status to be the only protective variable in
preventing leak. Clearly, some of these are nonmodifiable
risk factors, but the results led the authors to conclude that
optimizing preoperative nutrition and preoperative preha-
bilitation, two achievable goals, may have a role in improving
outcomes after gastric bypass surgery [25].
   Another group used the MBSAQIP data registry to study
a somewhat controversial topic, adolescent bariatric surgery.
The World Health Organization defines adolescence being
between the ages of 10 and 19 years old, and this is a popula-
tion that the United States “obesity epidemic” has not spared.
With severe obesity (BMI ≥120% of the 95th percentile for
age and sex) affecting 7.5% of adolescents aged 12–15 and
9.5% for those aged 16–19, the prevalence of the most severe
class of obesity has doubled in this population between 1999
and 2012 [26]. These patients are at an elevated risk of devel-
oping all the same obesity-related comorbidities as an adult
patient, including nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, which is
now the leading cause of liver failure in adolescents [27].
Chaar et al. investigated 30-day outcomes from bariatric pro-
cedures performed at MBSAQIP centers on all patients
≤19 years old from 2015 to 2017. They focused on primary
laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomies (LSG) and laparoscopic
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (LRYGB) operations and looked
at serious adverse events, organ space infections, and reop-
eration/reintervention rates. Length of operation, length of
stay, and readmissions were measured as secondary out-
comes. They identified 1983 adolescent patients that met the
profile. Sleeve gastrectomies outnumber gastric bypasses
almost 4:1. When compared to 353,726 adult patients under-
going the same procedures during the same timeframe, the
authors found no difference in outcomes. They did note a
statistically significant difference in the adolescent popula-
tion favoring sleeve gastrectomy over RYGB in both 30-day
136   T. L. LaMasters et al.

serious adverse events (2.9% vs 6.5%) and readmissions
(2.6% vs 5.6%). There was a non-statistically significant trend
in 30-day reoperation rate again favoring LSG compared to
LRYGB (1.1% vs 2.3%) [28]. This led the authors to conclude
that adolescents who undergo primary bariatric surgery pro-
cedures at MBSAQIP-accredited centers have a safety profile
that is similar to adult patients.
   In this chapter, we have attempted to provide the reader
with a succinct review of the evolution of metabolic and bar-
iatric surgery from a quality standpoint. Metabolic and bar-
iatric surgery is one of the great success stories of modern
quality improvement in healthcare, achieving unprecedented
safety and improved outcomes for the patients we serve. The
key principles of this evolution include the use of high-­
quality, reliable data organized around evidence-based stan-
dards to guide a structured approach to quality and process
improvement. These objectives are accomplished by the
contributions of multidisciplinary teams under the leadership
of the surgeon MBS Director with local MBS Committee
guidance and facility administrative support. It is an extraor-
dinary history when one considers that this surgical subspe-
cialty has barely been in existence for 50 years. As a specialty,
we have been able to move beyond individual sporadic case
outcomes to changes that broadly improve the system of care
for patient safety, for which we should all be proud.


Editor’s Note

In 2003, the Society of American Gastrointestinal and
Endoscopic Surgeons (SAGES) jointly with the ASMBS
approved the Guidelines for Institutions Granting Bariatric
Privileges Utilizing Laparoscopic Techniques [28]. The guide-
lines stipulate weight loss surgery should be practiced by
appropriately trained surgical teams within programs that
provide perioperative and long-term management [28]. In
2003, experts met at the SAGES Appropriateness Conference
and established the duodenal switch, banded gastroplasty,
   Chapter 7.   Accreditation Standards: Bariatric Surgery   137

laparoscopic adjustable band, and laparoscopic gastric bypass
as appropriate operations for weight loss based on current
evidence [28]. While other societies such as the ACS, ASMBS,
and the Betsy Lehman report use volume criteria (ranging
from 25 to 50 procedures annually) to recommend credential-
ing surgeons, the SAGES guidelines leave the responsibility
for privileging on the individual institutions, but recommend
input from a committee and the chief of surgery [28].

Minimum Requirements

1. Formal residency training in general surgery within an
   accredited program with subsequent certification by the
   American Board of Surgery if required by the institution
   [28].
2. Documentation that there exists adequate follow-up of
   patients including nursing care, dietary care, counseling,
   support groups, exercise training, psychological care if
   needed, and a method of identifying and managing compli-
   cations [28].
3. If the surgeon has formal training only in open bariatric
   surgery, SAGES recommends having a second surgeon
   who is trained in laparoscopic bariatric surgery and is
   therefore complementary to their expertise. Alternatively,
   the surgeon may participate in a proctored experience
   deemed adequate by the chief of surgery [28].
4. For surgeons without formal training in weight loss surgery
   (fellowship), preceptorship and/or formal courses are
   offered as alternatives. Any such courses should meet cat-
   egory 1 continuing medical education requirements and
   involved both didactics and hands-on experience with
   inanimate labs or tissue labs [28].
5. If the surgeon has documented formal training in laparo-
   scopic bariatric surgery, SAGES recommends that the vol-
   ume of open and laparoscopic cases be demonstrated for
   the type of procedures to be done and that a complemen-
   tary surgeon experienced in open procedures be available
138   T. L. LaMasters et al.

   if needed. The adequacy of case volume/experience is to be
   determined by the chief of surgery [28].
6. If the surgeon has no documented formal residency train-
   ing in either laparoscopic open bariatric surgery, they are
   expected to take a formal course and be proctored by a
   qualified surgeon who is approved by the institution of
   practice [28].

Institutional Support

Adequate equipment and staff training are expected to be in
place prior to starting a bariatric program. Two skilled sur-
geons are recommended for laparoscopic bariatric proce-
dures or a surgeon and a skilled first assistant [28].

Maintenance of Privileges

SAGES recommends that the chief of surgery or appropriate
institutional body should determine the criteria for provi-
sional privileges, monitoring of performance and outcomes,
and continuing education requirements such as meetings and
courses [28]. The guidelines state that outcome data should
be reviewed 6 months after privileges are granted, and regu-
larly thereafter, with comparison of the surgeon’s data to
national published benchmarks [28]. Any denial of privileges
should have an appeal process in place [28].


References
1. Blackstone RP. Chapter 4. The history of the American Society
   for metabolic and bariatric surgery. In: Nguyen N, Blackstone
   RP, Morton JM, Ponce J, Rosenthal RJ, editors. ASMBS text-
   book of bariatric surgery volume I bariatric surgery. New York
   Heidelberg Dordrecht London: Springer; 2015. p. 47–60.
2. Steinbrook R. Surgery for severe obesity, perspective. NEJM.
   2004;350:1076–9. https://www.nejm.org/na101/home/literatum/
   publisher/mms/journals/content/nejm/2004/nejm_2004.350.
      Chapter 7.   Accreditation Standards: Bariatric Surgery      139

      issue-­1 1/nejmp048029/production/images/img_medium/
      nejmp048029_f1.jpeg. Accessed 30 Nov 2020.
 3.   Flum DR, Salem L, Elrod JA, Dellinger EP, Cheadle A, Chan
      L. Early mortality among Medicare beneficiaries undergo-
      ing bariatric surgical procedures. JAMA. 2005;294(15):1903–8.
      https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.294.15.1903. PMID: 16234496.
 4.   Flum DR, Dellinger EP. Impact of gastric bypass oper-
      ation on survival: a population-based analysis. J Am Coll
      Surg.       20 04;199(4):543–51.      https://doi.org/10.10 16/j.
      jamcollsurg.2004.06.014.
 5.   Livingston EH, Langert J. The impact of age and Medicare status
      on bariatric surgical outcomes. Arch Surg. 2006;141(11):1115–20;
      discussion 1121. https://doi.org/10.1001/archsurg.141.11.1115.
      PMID: 17116805.
 6.   Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. Decision memo
      for bariatric surgery for the treatment of morbid obesity (CAG-­
      00250R). Bariatric surgery in Medicare beneficiaries – reconsid-
      eration. Coverage decision memorandum for bariatric surgery
      for treatment of co-morbidities associated with morbid obesity;
      Feb 21, 2006.
 7.   Champion JK, Pories WJ. Centers of excellence for bariatric
      surgery. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2005;1(2):148–51.
 8.   Birkmeyer JD, Shahian DM, Dimick JB, Finlayson SR, Flum
      DR, Ko CY, Hall BL. Blueprint for a new American College
      of Surgeons: National Surgical Quality Improvement Program.
      J Am Coll Surg. 2008;207(5):777–82. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
      jamcollsurg.2008.07.018. Epub 2008 Sep 19. PMID: 18954793.
 9.   Birkmeyer NJ, Dimick JB, Share D, Hawasli A, English WJ,
      Genaw J, Finks JF, Carlin AM, Birkmeyer JD, Michigan Bariatric
      Surgery Collaborative. Hospital complication rates with ­bariatric
      surgery in Michigan. JAMA. 2010;304(4):435–42. https://doi.
      org/10.1001/jama.2010.1034. PMID: 20664044.
10.   Dimick JB, Nicholas LH, Ryan AM, Thumma JR, Birkmeyer
      JD. Bariatric surgery complications before vs after implemen-
      tation of a national policy restricting coverage to centers of
      excellence. JAMA. 2013;309(8):792–9. https://doi.org/10.1001/
      jama.2013.755. PMID: 23443442; PMCID: PMC3785293.
11.   Nicholas LH, Dimick JB. Bariatric surgery in minority patients
      before and after implementation of a centers of excellence pro-
      gram. JAMA. 2013;310(13):1399–400. https://doi.org/10.1001/
      jama.2013.277915. PMID: 24030558; PMCID: PMC3832290.
140    T. L. LaMasters et al.

12. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. National Coverage
    Determination (NCD) for bariatric surgery for treatment of
    morbid obesity (100.1). Dec 2012. 100–3(4).
13. Blackstone RP. Chapter 14. Quality in bariatric surgery. In:
    Nguyen N, Blackstone RP, Morton JM, Ponce J, Rosenthal RJ,
    editors. ASMBS textbook of bariatric surgery volume I bariatric
    surgery. Springer; 2015. p. 157–82.
14. American College of Surgeons Website. Accessed 29 Nov 2020.
    https://www.facs.org/search/bariatric-­surgery-­centers?allresults=.
15. Optimal resources for metabolic and bariatric surgery 2019
    Standards. 2019. American College of Surgeons. Chicago, IL.
    facs.org/mbsaqip. Accessed 30 Nov 2020.
16. American College of Surgeons Website. Accessed 21 Nov
    2020.     https://www.facs.org/Quality-­P rograms/MBSAQIP/
    participant-­use.
17. Nguyen NT, Hohmann S, Nguyen XM, et al. Outcome of lapa-
    roscopic adjustable gastric banding and prevalence of band revi-
    sion and explanation at academic centers: 2007–2009. Surg Obes
    Relat Dis. 2012;8(6):724–7.
18. Gadaleta D, MD, FACS, FASMBS, Petrick AT, MD, FACS,
    FASMBS. Raising the standard: DROP—the first national
    MBSAQIP quality improvement project: decreasing read-
    missions through opportunities provided. Bariatric Times
    2019;16(2):16.
19. Morton JM. The first metabolic and bariatric surgery accredi-
    tation and quality improvement program quality initiative:
    decreasing readmissions through opportunities provided. Surg
    Obes Relat Dis. 2014;10(3):377–8.
20. Thorell A, MacCormick AD, Awad S, et al. Guidelines for
    perioperative care in bariatric surgery: Enhanced Recovery
    After Surgery (ERAS) Society recommendations. World J Surg.
    2016;40(9):2065–83.
21. Brethauer SA, M.D., Grieco A, M.P.H., Fraker T, M.S., R.N.,
    Evans-Labok K, B.A., Smith A, Pharm.D., B.C.P.S., McEvoy MD,
    M.D., Saber AA, M.D., Morton JM, M.D., Petrick A, M.D. Surgery
    for obesity and related diseases;15(2019):1977–1989.
22. American College of Surgeon Website. Accessed 15 Nov 2020.
    https://www.facs.org/-­/media/files/quality-­programs/bariatric/
    bstop_invitation_letter.ashx.
23. Raebel MA, Newcomer SR, Reifler LM, Boudreau D, Elliott
    TE, DeBar L, Ahmed A, Pawloski PA, Fisher D, Donahoo WT,
      Chapter 7.   Accreditation Standards: Bariatric Surgery        141

      Bayliss EA. Chronic use of opioid medications before and after
      bariatric surgery. JAMA. 2013;310(13):1369–76.
24.   Mocanu V, M.D., Dang J, M.D., Ladak F, M.P.H., M.D., Switzer
      N, M.P.H., M.D., F.R.C.S.C., Birch DW, M.Sc., M.D., F.R.C.S.C.,
      Karmali S, M.P.H., M.D., F.R.C.S.C. Surgery for obesity and
      related diseases;15(2019):396–403.
25.   Skinner AC, Skelton JA. Prevalence and trends in obesity and
      severe obesity among children in the United States, 1999–2012.
      JAMA Pediatr. 2014;168(6):561–6.
26.   Welsh JA, Karpen S, Vos MB. Increasing prevalence of non-
      alcoholic fatty liver disease among United States adolescents,
      1988–1994 to 2007–2010. J Pediatr. 2013;162(3):496–500.
27.   El Chaar M, King K, Al-Mardini A, Galvez A, Claros L, Stoltzfus
      J. Thirty-day outcomes of bariatric surgery in adolescents: a first
      look at the MBSAQIP database. Obes Surg. 2020;25:1–6.
28.   Society of American Gastrointestinal and Endoscopic Surgeons
      Bariatric Surgery Credentialing website. Accessed 27 Mar 2021.
      https://www.sages.org/wiki/bariatric-­surgery-­credentialing/.
Chapter 8
Resident Evaluation
and Mentorship:
Milestones in Surgical
Education
Ingrid S. Schmiederer and James N. Lau



Introduction
Residency training is dependent on effective and reliable
evaluation. For the purposes of ensuring self-sufficient, com-
petent surgeons with a commitment to patient safety, there is
expected to be a consistent framework for both summative
and formative assessment of the learner while they are still in
training. For program evaluation and accreditation, the
Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education
(ACGME) also sets standards through peer-reviewed pro-
cesses that ensure generalizable and relevant guidelines for
programs and their trainees nationally.


I. S. Schmiederer
Department of Surgery, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, CA, USA
J. N. Lau (*)
Loyola University Medical Center, Department of Surgery,
Maywood, IL, USA
e-mail: James.Lau@lumc.edu

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature   143
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_8
144   I. S. Schmiederer and J. N. Lau

    Traditionally, evaluation can be broken down into objec-
tive measures, such as standardized in-training exam scores,
institutional multiple-choice quizzes or verifications of profi-
ciency, and subjective measures, such as observations and
end-of-rotation faculty evaluations. On an individual trainee
level, a program director might look at the summation of
both measures to determine competency or promotion. On
an institutional level, the ACGME and institutional officials
review these measures to evaluate for program effectiveness
and, ultimately, accreditation. There is potential for error at
both levels, as individual evaluations are often too subjective
or lack consistency comprehensive enough for learners to
make necessary changes in their trajectory. The evaluations
themselves often ask faculty to rate trainees using numbered
scales. Translating resident performance to scales can be dif-
ficult because of the loss of detail, introduction of bias, and
difficulty in determining cut points. In fact, previous studies
have shown that selecting numeric values to characterize
subjective competencies is challenging and complex for both
the evaluator and the trainee, highlighting the need for a
more customizable model of assessment [1]. Furthermore,
individual institutions may have unique assessment tools that
are not generalizable across other residency programs. At the
same time, institutional officials and program directors may
focus on “teaching to the test” as they meet program accredi-
tation standards rather than assuring standardized training.
This may alter analysis on a national level.
    To address some of the potential limitations to resident
assessment and evaluation, the ACGME began
­implementation of the Next Accreditation System (NAS) in
 2013 for seven core specialties, including surgery, which ulti-
 mately led to the establishment of Milestones [2, 3]. In each
 specialty, the Milestones resulted from a close collaboration
 among the ACGME, certifying boards like the American
 Board of Surgery (ABS), review committees, specialty orga-
 nizations, program-director associations such as the
     8   Resident Evaluation and Mentorship: Milestones…     145

Association of Program Directors in Surgery (APDS), and
residents in “working groups.” The process of establishing
Milestones created a national framework for assessment that
enables comparison data and enhances resident education
with quality and safety [4]. Additionally, the ACGME’s
requirement to use Milestones to track residents’ progress
and outcomes has now required further elucidation of these
assessment methods so that faculty and program directors
might be informed and better trained themselves [5].
   This chapter will discuss these Milestones in the context of
surgical education – not simply as a perceived obligation or
tool for assessment, but also as a means of anchoring and
framing mentorship. Surgical faculty often deliver invaluable
training based on key educational theory or principles, per-
haps without being fully cognizant of the history of these
educational ideologies. Certain approaches to surgical skill
learning may be more applicable or beneficial for certain
trainees, but without the background knowledge, it may be
difficult to actually apply the available tools [5]. With focused
education about the origins and best practices for Milestones
as a developmental tool, as well as elaboration about the
development of surgical Entrustable Professional Activities
(EPAs), the authors hope to provide an aid and structure for
mentors and mentees as they use the evaluation process as an
agency for constructive feedback and effective guidance.
   Similar to Milestones, Entrustable Professional Activities
(EPAs) are a framework around units of work and the assign-
ment of entrustment for the autonomous performance of
these work tasks. Created by Olle Ten Cate and colleagues in
Utrecht, this framework encapsulates competencies and
milestones into discrete, definable and assessable tasks that
rely on content experts to determine when supervision levels
are attained. EPAs may provide a more manageable way to
assess residents’ Core Competencies as outlined by ACGME
and are presented in a Milestones format to ensure quality
healthcare to patients [6].
146   I. S. Schmiederer and J. N. Lau

 ow Did the ACGME and Its Working
H
Groups Come Up with Milestones?
As described by the ACGME, Milestones are made up of
agreed-upon attributes adapted from the ACGME’s six Core
Competencies (Patient Care and Procedural Skills, Medical
Knowledge, Practice-Based Learning and Improvement,
Interpersonal Communication Skills, Professionalism,
Systems-Based Practice) that were then divided into sub-­
competencies and organized into a developmental frame-
work of levels using the Dreyfus model of skill acquisition.
Developed in 1980 by Hubert and Stuart Dreyfus, the
Dreyfus model of skill acquisition proposes a framework of
five levels: novice, advanced beginner, competent, proficient,
and expert [7]. In general surgery, the levels are briefly bro-
ken down into (1) meets expectations of an incoming resi-
dent; (2) demonstrates sufficiency at a mid-residency level;
(3) demonstrates the majority of the Milestones in the sub-­
competency; (4) able to substantially demonstrate the
Milestones targeted for residency graduation; and (5) an
expert resident whose achievements in a sub-competency are
greater than the expectation [5]. Students objectively “pass”
these levels, along a developmental scale, as they acquire
competency in specific skills. With this, residents are consid-
ered ready for training completion when they have met the
requirements of Level 4. At the completion of training, then,
the Milestones are meant to provide data about graduates’
performances before entering unsupervised practice [4].
    This continuum framework lends itself well to the notion
that learning and potential skill level are not finite or bound
by time. Therefore, education and expectations might be
­better suited for learners when the learners are approached
 by evaluators or mentors based on their competency levels,
 rather than postgraduate year (PGY) or even age. This con-
 cept of competency-based education may prove challenging
 for a clinical competency committee (CCC) at a residency
 program that is expected to complete evaluations, to select
 the Milestone levels and to graduate residents within the tra-
     8   Resident Evaluation and Mentorship: Milestones…     147

ditional 5–7-year timeframe. Still, competency-based educa-
tion arguably enhances feedback and guidance for surgeons
at different levels.


 hat Is Competency-Based Medical
W
Education and How Does It Apply Here?
Competency-based medical education (CBME) has been
called “an approach to preparing physicians for practice that
is fundamentally oriented to graduate outcome abilities and
[it is] organized around competencies derived from an analy-
sis of societal and patient needs. It de-emphasizes time-based
training and promises a greater accountability, flexibility, and
learner-centeredness...” [8]
    The acquisition of competencies and integrating knowl-
edge, skills, and attitudes in practice should be affirmed in the
workplace in a timely manner and in such a way that the
learner might self-reflect and adjust their approaches before
habits are formed. This competency-based approach requires
that trainees are accurately certified for specific competen-
cies after they have demonstrated proficiency or have passed
a specific threshold that allows for limited supervision or
unsupervised practice [9]. CBME requires frequent and accu-
rate assessments that should represent the full range of
ACGME Core Competencies. This is a benefit of having
Milestones framework, as it lists these most crucial (and
officially-designated) skills needed for graduation. In addi-
tion, CBME, along with Milestones, focuses on performance
outcomes of the trainees while providing transparency and
holding everyone in the education process accountable.
Ultimately, a competency-based framework provides a mea-
surable goal and visible educational outcomes which can be
utilized for future decision-making [10].
    More broadly, as Tekian et al. explain in a comprehensive
and constructive review of the Milestones, Milestones also
provide an excellent way to guide the process of education
with curriculum development, assessment, feedback, and
148   I. S. Schmiederer and J. N. Lau

learner self-assessment. Still, Milestones by themselves are
not sufficient. Completing the Milestone checklist or scaled
system does not capture overall competency every time. This
process also requires integration of training experiences,
assessments, and holistic feedback [10]. Competency, from
this perspective, remains subjective, as it must be constructed
and reconstructed to enhance assessment tools that are
designed for objective measures. Measurement instru-
ments like the Milestones quantify a construct, but they can
also shape how we think about and teach the construct itself
[11].
    Other studies have demonstrated the utility of narrative
evaluations or descriptive comments for a resident’s behav-
ior within evaluations, to enhance scale-based evaluations.
Observations by multiple raters in multiple situations are
known to enhance reliability and validity evidence for assess-
ment tools, in order to obtain the “true” score that properly
represents the individual [11]. Despite the perceived ease of
a straightforward checklist, a meaningful narrative is more
useful in describing the student’s progress. Comments and
narrative provide a more powerful way to justify one’s judg-
ments of a trainee’s progress along the road to competence.
Not only that, but evaluators can also defend their assess-
ments of trainees’ competency and provide specific feedback
to improve [10].
    This is perhaps where mentorship between faculty and
residents plays a crucial role in trainee development and
evaluation. There is a wealth of literature in support of the
benefit of mentorship for career advancement. Surgical
training itself, through Halsted’s residency system, uses a
­
­mentorship/apprenticeship model to “produce not only sur-
 geons, but surgeons of the highest type...[surgeons] who will
 stimulate the first youths of our country to study surgery and
 to devote their energies and their lives to raising the standard
 of surgical science” [12].
     8   Resident Evaluation and Mentorship: Milestones…      149

    Milestones might guide mentoring conversations at check-
points throughout training – around evaluators’ and trainees’
experiences – within a developmental framework. The true
challenge is guidance within context-based experience and
situational awareness in the real world. The live workplace
environment has less controllable social or environmental
factors. As a result, the oft-implied workplace curriculum with
both direct mentorship guidance and indirect environmental
guidance. Becomes the framework in a real-world setting to
foster the acquisition of competencies that are necessary for
varying stages of accountability. This requires direct observa-
tion by evaluators in real time to gain a sense of actual skills
of the trainee and this may not be fully captured in the check-
list of Milestones or in end-of-rotation meetings, as previ-
ously mentioned. Misalignment between observed skills
versus expected skills or between expected level of supervi-
sion versus actual level of supervision required may place a
patient’s safety at risk. This also puts the learner in a position
to make a potentially preventable medical error [13].
    There is no room for veiled language or a reduced check-
list approach when protecting patient safety. This is where the
“true” resident must be evaluated both within themselves and
by their evaluators with clear and observed evidence – to
prevent that misalignment of actual versus expected skills. A
mentor or teacher must be specific in their feedback. The use
of observed examples in real time, as described in the mutu-
ally beneficial construct of “entrustment,” is proven to be
effective. Can I trust this trainee to care for our patients? Have
they given me any reason or situation to doubt their compe-
tence? What is the evidence behind my entrustment of this
individual in caring for my patient? The concept of entrust-
ment, then, is essential to our assessment culture. In tradi-
tional models, entrustment was an implicit judgment that
faculty made on a day-to-day basis. With CBME, it can be
explicitly and more objectively expressed by rating trainees
using entrustment anchors/scales: through Entrustable
Professional Activities (EPAs).
150   I. S. Schmiederer and J. N. Lau

 hat Are EPAs? How Do They Work
W
for Surgical Training?
Residency is on-the-job training, and therefore, Entrustable
Professional Activities (EPAs) are job duties that are measur-
able units of observable work. EPAs are units of professional
practice (tasks) that may be entrusted to a learner to execute
unsupervised, once they have demonstrated the required
competency. This shifts and broadens the focus from individ-
ual competencies to the work that must be performed as a
whole. EPAs are important routine activities of a discipline
that encompass the ACGME Core Competencies and
Milestones within them, for safe and effective performance
[13]. Assessing and deciding how much autonomy can be
given for this unit of duty requires the integration of multiple
competencies. In other words, these units of work add more
practical and tangible elements to the developmental frame-
work of Milestones. An EPAs-based workplace curriculum
can individually map out a route for individual trainees with
summative entrustment decisions at significant moments in
their training that lead to acknowledged permission to act in
patient care [9].
   Surgery allows for workplace assessments to be compart-
mentalized into discrete duties, since this is essentially how
we already work with residents. Ad hoc decisions of entrust-
ment are executed every day with residents and students on
surgery rotations. Ten Cate defines competency in the clinical
setting as the level at which a professional activity is “mas-
tered”: a threshold level that permits trust and where the
trainee can act unsupervised [9]. Prior to determining formal
duties or EPAs, however, a program must define the opera-
tional definition of competence/entrustment. Competency is
but a stage in a developmental continuum from novice to
mastery. The breadth of competencies that surgeons must
assume is large, but the concrete EPAs for a specialty or ser-
vice are well recognized by the specialty and are manageable
by number and category. It is through these stages that
Hirschl reinforces that a gradation of responsibility signifi-
     8   Resident Evaluation and Mentorship: Milestones…     151

cantly enhances competency-based assessments for surgical
residents [14]. Every specialty would know which EPAs are
necessary to care for patients safely to master residency
expectations. Assessments of EPAs have not been officially
incorporated into evaluations of surgical autonomy, but they
start to line up with Milestones by providing valuable bench-
marks for skills acquisition and characterizing degrees to
which a responsibility may be consigned to a trainee [15].
   There is a great deal of interest in formulating EPAs for
general surgery training and in residency training in general.
The American Board of Surgery has undergone a pilot in
assigning and evaluating the use of EPAs in broad categories
for general surgery residency. There are also EPA pilots for-
mally being conducted and evaluated in undergraduate medi-
cal education [16]. Further, once EPAs and bidirectional
feedback evolve into a feedback culture on the continuum of
training, then further granular feedback might be accom-
plished through designated nested EPAs [17]. Nested EPAs
break down high complexity tasks into smaller ones. This
ensures that all members of an interprofessional team have a
defined task that is clear and accessible and it elicits feedback
that ensures quality care and patient safety.
   Overall, Ten Cate defines five levels of supervision that
may be employed with each EPA. As Lindeman clarifies
through “Entrustable Professional Activities (EPAs) and
Applications to Surgical Training,” in Resources In Surgical
Education (RISE), these are aligned with progressive respon-
sibility measures, like the Milestones, albeit imperfectly,
toward independent practice [18]:
1. Observation but no execution by the trainee, even with
   direct supervision
2. Execution with direct, proactive supervision
3. Execution with reactive supervision, i.e., on request and
   quickly available
4. Supervision at a distance and/or post hoc
5. Supervision provided by the trainee to more junior
   colleagues
152   I. S. Schmiederer and J. N. Lau

Looking forward, clinical competency committees could be
the formal entrustment committees that assign supervision
levels and Milestone levels for residents. Evaluation data for
the EPAs can be supported with a myriad of datapoints, such
as observed structured assessment of technical skills (OSATs),
clinical encounter assessments, teamwork assessments, multi-
source feedback, simulation verification of proficiencies,
operative assessments (i.e., SIMPL), and others. With this,
each EPA would be mapped to several Milestones. Residents
would then receive assessment of Milestones as entrustment
levels are determined. Specific EPAs with entrustment levels
would be the focus of biannual feedback sessions for a defin-
able, timely, and actionable course of action. Once generaliz-
able EPAs are more routinely used, a surgical education
framework specific to the implementation of entrustment,
might be implemented and provide transparency for both
faculty and trainees. Ultimately, through identifying gaps in
entrustment and in learning, residency leadership will be able
to formulate customized teaching plans for mentored guid-
ance in ensuring surgical quality and patient safety.


Bibliography
1. van Mook WNKA, Gorter SL, O’Sullivan H, Wass V, Schuwirth
   LW, van der Vleuten CPM. Approaches to professional behav-
   iour assessment: tools in the professionalism toolbox. Eur
   J Intern Med. 2009;20(8):e153–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
   ejim.2009.07.012.
2. SurgeryMilestones.pdf. Accessed 4 Sept 2020. https://www.
   acgme.org/Portals/0/PDFs/Milestones/SurgeryMilestones.pdf.
3. Cogbill TH, Malangoni MA, Potts JR, Valentine RJ. The general
   surgery milestones project. J Am Coll Surg. 2014;218(5):1056–62.
   https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jamcollsurg.2014.02.016.
4. Nasca TJ, Philibert I, Brigham T, Flynn TC. The next GME
   accreditation system — rationale and benefits. N Engl J Med.
   2012;366(11):1051–6. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMsr1200117.
5. Rawlings A, Knox ADC, Park YS, et al. Development and
   evaluation of standardized narrative cases depicting the general
   ­surgery professionalism milestones. Acad Med. 2015;90(8):1109–
    15. https://doi.org/10.1097/ACM.0000000000000739.
     8   Resident Evaluation and Mentorship: Milestones…        153

 6. Sadideen H, Plonczak A, Saadeddin M, Kneebone R. How edu-
    cational theory can inform the training and practice of plastic
    surgeons. Plast Reconstr Surg Glob Open. 2018;6(12):e2042.
    https://doi.org/10.1097/GOX.0000000000002042.
 7. Peña A. The Dreyfus model of clinical problem-solving skills
    acquisition: a critical perspective. Medical Education Online.
    2010;15(1):1-N.PAG. https://doi.org/10.3402/meo.v15i0.4846.
 8. Frank JR, Snell LS, Cate OT, Holmboe ES, Carraccio C, Swing
    SR, Harris P, Glasgow NJ, Campbell C, Dath D, Harden RM,
    Iobst W, Long DM, Mungroo R, Richardson DL, Sherbino J,
    Silver I, Taber S, Talbot M, Harris KA. Competency-based medi-
    cal education: theory to practice. Med Teach. 2010;32(8):638–45.
 9. Ten Cate O, Chen HC, Hoff RG, Peters H, Bok H, van der
    Schaaf M. Curriculum development for the workplace using
    Entrustable Professional Activities (EPAs): AMEE Guide No.
    99. Med Teach. 2015;37(11):983–1002. https://doi.org/10.3109/01
    42159X.2015.1060308.
10. Tekian A, Hodges BD, Roberts TE, Schuwirth L, Norcini
    J. Assessing competencies using milestones along the way.
    Med Teach. 2015;37(4):399–402. https://doi.org/10.3109/01421
    59X.2014.993954.
11. Regehr G, Ginsburg S, Herold J, Hatala R, Eva K,
    Oulanova O. Using “Standardized Narratives” to explore
    new ways to represent faculty opinions of resident perfor-
    mance. Acad Med. 2012;87(4):419–27. https://doi.org/10.1097/
    ACM.0b013e31824858a9.
12. Kerr B, O’Leary JP. The training of the surgeon: Dr.
    Halsted’s greatest legacy. The American Surgeon; Atlanta.
    1999;65(11):1101–2.
13. Carraccio C, Englander R, Gilhooly J, et al. Building a frame-
    work of entrustable professional activities, supported by
    competencies and milestones, to bridge the educational con-
    tinuum. Acad Med. 2017;92(3):324–30. https://doi.org/10.1097/
    ACM.0000000000001141.
14. Hirschl RB. The making of a surgeon: 10,000 hours? J
    Pediatr Surg. 2015;50(5):699–706. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
    jpedsurg.2015.02.061.
15. Wagner JP, Lewis CE, Tillou A, et al. Use of entrustable
    professional activities in the assessment of surgical resident
    competency. JAMA Surg. 2018;153(4):335–43. https://doi.
    ­
    org/10.1001/jamasurg.2017.4547.
154    I. S. Schmiederer and J. N. Lau

16. Loomis K, Amiel JM, Ryan MS, Esposito K, Green M, Stagnaro-­
    Green A, Bull J, Mejicano GC (for the AAMC Core EPAs for
    Entering Residency Pilot Team). Implementing an entrustable
    professional activities framework in undergraduate medical
    education: early lessons from the AAMC core entrustable
    professional activities for entering residency pilot. Acad Med.
    2017;92(6):765–70.
17. Angus S, Moriarty J, Nardino RJ, Chmielewski A, Rosenblum
    MJ. ‘Internal medicine residents’ perspectives on receiving feed-
    back in milestone format. J Grad Med Educ. 2015;7(2):220–4.
    https://doi.org/10.4300/JGME-­D-­14-­0 0446.1.
18. Lindeman B, Petrusa E Phitayakorn, R. Entrustable Professional
    Activities (EPAs) and applications to surgical training.
    2017 June. Retrieved from https://www.facs.org/education/
    division-­of-­education/publications/rise/articles/entrustable.
Chapter 9
Implementing Quality
Improvement at Your
Institution
Michael Ghio, Danuel Laan, and Shauna Levy




Chapter Objectives
• To describe how to align key stakeholders to implement
  quality improvement locally
• To discuss clinical areas which might benefit from orga-
  nized quality improvement initiatives


Introduction
In the last several decades there has been a paradigm shift
toward improving quality within healthcare that is at least in
part motivated by the growing relationship between reim-
bursement and patient outcomes. Quality improvement (QI)
and patient safety are rightfully gaining momentum as
healthcare professionals across the country strive to be lead-
ers in improving and innovating care in their respective fields.

M. Ghio · D. Laan · S. Levy (*)
Tulane University School of Medicine & Tulane Medical Center,
New Orleans, LA, USA
e-mail: mghio@tulane.edu; dlaan@tulane.edu; slevy10@tulane.edu

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature   155
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_9
156   M. Ghio et al.

   Broadly, QI is a thoughtful, deliberate process designed to
improve patient outcomes on the whole, whether they be
process or outcome measurements. QI includes identification
of factors that impact patient outcomes either positively or
negatively, with the objective being to minimize elements of
care that lead to poor results and implementing or maximiz-
ing processes that lead to improved patient care. Once these
components are identified, a team is mobilized to form a plan
of action for improving outcomes. Implementation of the
plan is followed by monitoring and evaluation of the strate-
gies that were executed to improve patient care.
   While institutions and quality improvement teams in dif-
ferent fields may share similar goals and methods of deploy-
ing strategies, many specifics of QI are site and field
dependent. No two hospital sites or healthcare networks are
the same, so tailoring of care and quality improvement, which
are dependent on such characteristics as patient population,
facilities and equipment, variability in surgical procedures,
and composition of staff, is individualized at each site. There
are, however, many lessons that can be learned from both the
successful and unsuccessful practices implemented by differ-
ent disciplines and institutions. We hope to help the reader
understand the fundamental components of basic quality
improvement and provide insight into how the respective
parts can be tailored to individual institutions.
   In this chapter, we will take a look at the history of QI and
discuss implementation of QI programs with emphasis on the
important role of institutional stakeholders. We will describe
why stakeholders are important, how to identify stakeholders,
and share strategies for utilizing their skillsets and interests to
maximize success. A review of the ways in which successful
and unsuccessful QI attempts can benefit institutions and
ultimately patient care will follow. We will end with an exami-
nation of clinical areas that are likely to benefit from QI and
consideration of patient safety in the new era of COVID-19.
Chapter 9.   Implementing Quality Improvement at Your…      157

 istory of Quality Improvement
H
Implementation
One of the first impetuses for quality improvement began in
1998 with the President’s Advisory Commission on Consumer
Protection and Quality in the Health Care Industry [1]. The
Commission was created by President Bill Clinton in March
1997 with a goal to “advise the President on changes occur-
ring in the health care system and recommend measures as
may be necessary to promote and assure health care quality
and value and protect consumers and workers in the health
care system.” [1] This report provided a clear set of goals,
including [1]:

1. Reducing the underlying causes of illness, injury, and
   disability
2. Expanding research on new treatments and evidence on
   effectiveness
3. Assuring appropriate use
4. Reducing healthcare errors
5. Addressing oversupply and undersupply of healthcare
   resources
6. Increasing patients’ participation in their care

   The Commission not only directed that these goals be
implemented, but it had the foresight to stipulate that mea-
surable objectives (such as consumer satisfaction, clinical
quality performance, service performance measures like wait-
ing time), which were later recognized as a hallmark of qual-
ity improvement, be used to evaluate each of these aims [1].
Another influential part of this report was its r­ ecommendation
to organizations that they structure their systems to include
clear leaders and stakeholders with varying levels of motiva-
tion. The report released by the President’s Advisory
Commission on Consumer Protection and Quality in Health
Care Industry set the foundation for future efforts in QI.
158   M. Ghio et al.

   In response to the initial report by President Clinton, in
1999, the Institute of Medicine (IOM) published its popular,
landmark publication, To Err Is Human: Building a Safer
Health System, which showed that close to 100,000 people in
the United States were dying each year due to medical errors
[2]. This astounding number was more than car crashes
(43,458), breast cancer (42,297), and AIDS (16,516) [2]. The
initial report also demanded a 50% reduction in medical
errors over the next 5 years [2]. There was widespread atten-
tion from both the public media and the healthcare sector.
Notably, the federal government set aside 50 million dollars
annually for patient safety efforts [3]. The IOM continued its
investigation of these concerning statistics, in 2001, publishing
Crossing the Quality Chasm: Health System for the twenty-­first
Century, which identified six aims that laid the foundation for
improving quality improvement [4]. These six aims were [4]:

1. Safe: not doing harm
2. Effective: using proven therapies to treat, not experimental
   or personal experiences
3. Patient centered: understanding the individual needs of
   your patient
4. Timely: trying to reduce wait or delays to care
5. Efficient: reducing unnecessary use of resources
6. Equitable: care that does not vary due to gender, ethnicity,
   location, or socioeconomic status

   Subsequent to the release of Crossing the Quality Chasm:
Health System for the twenty-first Century, the United States
saw an increase in the number of grants to study QI, an
increase in publications related to patient safety, and a reduc-
tion in medical errors [5]. These six pillars remain the guiding
force of healthcare QI in the United States and provide a
benchmark to focus for the provision of care in the modern
era.
   Other initiatives designed to continue improving patient
safety arose at about this same time, including the develop-
ment of “serious reportable events” in 2002 by the National
Chapter 9.   Implementing Quality Improvement at Your…       159

Quality Forum (NQF) [6]. These broadly fell into the follow-
ing categories, as determined by the NQF [6]:

1. Surgical or Invasive Procedure Events: such as wrong site
   surgery
2. Product or Device Events: such as a contaminated device
   resulting in a death/serious injury
3. Patient Protection Events: such as patient suicide while
   inpatient
4. Care Management Events: such as a serious event/death
   due to medication error
5. Environmental Events: injury such as electrical shock or
   burn while in the hospital or injury secondary to use of
   physical restraints
6. Radiologic Events: such as death or injury of patient or
   staff associated with introducing a metallic object in MRI
   field
7. Potential Criminal Events: such as impersonation of
   healthcare member, abduction of a patient

   In 2004, the Joint Commission published its national
patient safety goals, and in December of that same year, in
response to the Joint Commission’s goals, the Institute of
Healthcare Improvement (IHI) launched its “100,000 Lives
Campaign” with the intent to improve safety and outcomes.
In their initial campaign in 2006, the IHI cited statistics show-
ing that about 100,000 people die annually due to medical
injuries and high rates of hospital-acquired infection [7]. Per
the Institute’s initial report, specific aims were defined,
including:

1. Deploy rapid response teams that include a physician,
   nurse, and a respiratory therapist that respond prior to a
   code event [7].
2. Deliver reliable, evidence-based care for acute myocardial
   infection (AMI). This was based on the worrisome fact that
   every year, 350,000 out of a total 900,000 patients die of
   AMI in the acute period [8].
160   M. Ghio et al.

3. Prevent adverse drug events that result in over 7000 deaths
   annually [2].
4. Prevent central line infections by examining five compo-
   nents of care aimed at reducing risk: handwashing, barrier
   precautions, use of chlorohexidine, site choice, and daily
   evaluation of need, or the removal of a line no longer indi-
   cated [7].
5. Prevent surgical site infections by using preoperative anti-
   biotics when indicated, appropriate hair removal, glucose
   control, and perioperative normothermia [7].
6. Prevent ventilator-associated pneumonia by elevating the
   head of bed between 30° and 45°, sedation vacations with
   daily evaluations for extubation, peptic ulcer prophylaxis,
   and deep venous thrombosis prophylaxis [7, 9, 10].

   IHI’s campaign was successful, enrolling about 3100 hospi-
tals (75% of all hospitals in the United States at that time)
[11]. Over the following 18 months, IHI’s efforts were esti-
mated to result in 122,000 fewer deaths [11]. This effort
yielded a number of other spin-off projects across the world
and encouraged efforts by individual systems.
   The development of checklists accelerated as checklists
became a well-known means to improve quality of care in
various settings. Notably, in 2007, Dr. Peter Pronovost’s use of
checklists in the intensive care unit was lauded for its preven-
tion of catheter-associated infections [12]. Similarly, Dr. Atul
Gawande expanded the use of surgical checklists in 2008;
using Dr. Gawande’s checklists, the rate of death significantly
declined (from 1.5% to 0.8%), and inpatient complications
similarly decreased from 11.0% to 7.0% (both statistically
significant) [13]. At about the same time, the World Health
Organization developed a Surgical Safety Checklist and con-
ducted a global study that was published in the New England
Journal of Medicine in 2009 showing that use of checklists is
associated with both decreased complications and decreased
mortality [13].
   In 2010, the Health Information Technology for Economic
and Clinical Health (HITECH) Act was passed that provided
Chapter 9.   Implementing Quality Improvement at Your…       161

30 billion dollars to healthcare systems to incentivize hospi-
tals to use electronic health records. In 2011, the NQF again
published an update expanding its list of serious events to be
aware of while simultaneously reiterating demand for
accountability from healthcare organizations [14]. In this
report, the NQF recommended healthcare systems search for
gaps in their care and encourage frequent and high-quality
reviews specific to departments and categories of patient
interventions, followed by incorporation of findings to
improve care delivered [14]. In 2015, the Department of
Health and Human Services announced a change in
Medicare’s payment policies, such that payments would be
based on quality, instead of purely volume, thus representing
a further shift in the paradigm.
   While the above examples are not an exhaustive list of all
the safety and patient-quality care measures taken in the last
several decades, they do illustrate the growing importance
placed on QI by governing officials, hospitals, and healthcare
systems. Although these government agencies, professional
organizations, and leaders in the field make the case for QI
and provide guidance, frameworks, and insight, it is most
often left to individual healthcare networks and hospitals to
implement QI.


Identification of Key Stakeholders
At an institutional level, the first step in QI is identifying an
area in which a hospital or department can improve on. This
can be done through a variety of methods including observa-
tion of trends such as a higher than nationally reported infec-
tion rate associated with a procedure, use of the American
College of Surgeons National Surgical Quality Improvement
Program (NSQIP) data, or by having townhall-style sessions
to identify deficiencies seen by frontline workers.
   Quality can broadly be measured in terms of the following
four aspects [15, 16]:
162   M. Ghio et al.

1. Structure: Easily measurable components of a hospital,
   such as volume (of hospital, individual surgeons), not as
   readily amenable to quality improvement processes.
2. Process: The individual steps of a patient’s care that lead to
   outcomes. This can be preoperative, intraoperative, or post-
   operative. Common postoperative process measures
   include cessation of prophylactic antibiotics within 24 h,
   removal of urinary catheters, and ambulation within 6 h of
   surgery.
3. Outcome: Broadly speaking, morbidity and mortality asso-
   ciated with surgery. Frequently seen as the most important
   to patients and surgeons, given the severity.
4. Composite: Multiple of the above.
    Once an area requiring improvement has been identified,
 a fundamental first step is the identification of key stakehold-
 ers. A stakeholder is any individual who is impacted by a
 project and/or has an ability to influence its success and fail-
 ure. Stakeholders are important because they provide a vari-
 ety of lenses through which to identify and view problems
 along with a diverse group of approaches to addressing needs
 or shortcomings. Additionally, either directly or indirectly,
 stakeholders increase awareness of problems, promote trans-
 parency during periods of change, and increase the likelihood
 of commitment to QI through their participation [17].
    It is important to think about the range of departments
and individuals who play a role related to the area of need
and, with that in mind, identify as many stakeholders as pos-
sible, from administrators, to pharmacists, nurses, physicians,
housekeeping, basically every level of staff at an institution. It
is useful to then sort stakeholders through use of a continuum
in regard to their power (ability to contribute) and interest
level (Fig. 9.1). Each stakeholder is motivated differently:
whether by improvement in patient care, recognition for
­success, financial success if incentives are involved, or effi-
 ciency resulting in increased time to use for other activities.
    While there is a tendency to invite staff, who are receptive
 and have readily apparent motivations for participating, it is
 important to also include staff who may seem resistant to
Chapter 9.   Implementing Quality Improvement at Your…                 163



   Lower interest, high power              High interest, high power


         Keep satisfied                        Manage closely




                                                                       Power
   Lower interest, low power               High interest, low power


             Monitor                            Keep informed



                                Interest

Figure 9.1 Relationship between interest, power, and involvement
in quality improvement

change. Missing a stakeholder or failing to identify stakehold-
ers who may resist change can result in inefficient implemen-
tation and immediate or delayed failure of a QI project. By
targeting naysayers for inclusion on the stakeholder team,
their objections can be identified early and ideally be
addressed in components of the plan proactively. As a brief
example, when thinking about implementing a time out qual-
ity improvement project, it is essential to involve all parties in
this project. From surgeons, to anesthesiologists, to circulators
and scrub techs, each one will have a different opinion on the
project’s usefulness and the time required for its successful
implementation. Failure to engage one of these parties can
result in frustration or missing a crucial part of the process.
   Analysis of the various stakeholders should be a multidis-
ciplinary effort to ensure every area of the institution that
impacts or is impacted by a particular patient outcome is
represented. An effective way to approach this is to create a
process map – this is a way to identify each action required to
complete a task from beginning to completion [18]. A process
map should be created for every project and can be accu-
rately created by walking through the desired action, speak-
ing with various staff members, or looking at required
164   M. Ghio et al.

documentation [18]. In doing so, one can accurately identify
every stakeholder. This is particularly important as the litera-
ture has showed the number of steps involved in a surgery or
procedure is directly correlated with the numbers of errors
and can guide decision-making in a quality improvement
project [18].
   The identification of each stakeholder is important in and
of itself, but each will have a different perspective on the
problem and project, and this should be a component of
analysis. Stakeholders will often only buy into the quality
improvement project if the expected outcome is identifiable
or there is some benefit to their particular department or
area of responsibility – whether it be financial, improved
patient care, or saved time, to name a few. Once a stakehold-
er’s motivation has been identified, evidence must be pre-
sented as to how the project will make their specific job more
streamlined or meaningful. While not every QI project will
make someone’s job easier per se, if it improves patient out-
comes or makes a seemingly meaningless action more mean-
ingful and purpose driven, its likelihood of being successful is
greater. While the inclusion of a diverse group of stakehold-
ers encourages a view of the problem and possible responses,
it is natural that the broader the list of stakeholders, the
greater the risk for potential conflict as systems are poten-
tially redesigned [17, 19]. Not all stakeholders are flexible or
readily adaptable to change. This is where transparency is
essential, with a clear focus of the project with an identifiable,
visible deficiency that the team is attempting to correct.
Examples may include data showing a higher-than expected
rate of infections, patient feedback noting an area of defi-
ciency, or reports showing rates of “never events” at your
hospital.
   Once stakeholders have been identified, the leadership
team should be assembled. In our experience, this should
include the following members [20]:
Chapter 9.   Implementing Quality Improvement at Your…      165

1. Project Leader: This individual is primarily in charge of
   organizing the daily activities and has a vested interest in
   its success. Ideally, one person takes the lead on an
   activity.
2. Subject Leaders: These members of the team are those that
   have leadership roles in the area that you are attempting to
   improve. For example, if attempting to improve hand
   hygiene on a surgical floor, this would include the nursing
   leaders on that floor and the housekeeping leader, in addi-
   tion to a surgical leader. It is important to identify every
   level of leadership within a system of change. There will be
   several people who compose this facet of the team.
3. Project Mentor: Ideally, a QI director or someone else at
   the institution with experience in implementing projects.
4. Project Mentees: Every project should involve learners
   (residents, medical students, nursing students, etc.) with an
   interest in QI who can get involved and learn side by side
   with the team.
5. Support Members: This can include other physicians, phar-
   macists, students, or any member who has the time and
   ability to help with implementation and studying the
   effects of the project.
6. Patients: Including patients in the team incorporates a per-
   spective often forgotten about, that of likely the biggest
   stakeholder. Ultimately, these changes should benefit their
   care, and understanding their perspective is important and
   educational.

   The designation of a leadership team and delineation of
responsibilities among members gives the group structure
and increases efficiency and opportunity for success [17].
However, for the team to accomplish its goals, there must be
a sense of camaraderie with little emphasis on hierarchy.
Excitement about the prospect of identifying a common goal
to address the problem or area of need is essential, and a
thirst for achieving this outcome is important. It is also
important the team be receptive to feedback and motivated.
166   M. Ghio et al.

  Following selection of the team, the team must articulate
what it is trying to accomplish in measurable terms, develop
a method for measuring the aim, and articulate how it will
evaluate outcomes and project overall. There is excellent sup-
port for this “model for improvement” which asks three fun-
damental questions [21]:

1. What are we trying to accomplish?
2. How will we know a change is an improvement?
3. What change can we make that will result in improvement?

   Once the team has established what it is trying to accom-
plish and how they will measure it, they can develop an initial
“PDSA” cycle – standing for “plan, do, study, act.” During the
plan portion, the team attempts to set a specific goal with a
focus on details. For example, returning to our hand hygiene
case, the team would need to identify a specific goal (i.e., the
percentage, or number of people, etc.) instead of just saying
“We will improve handwashing rates.” Another part of setting
the goal is the need to set a goal timeframe, such as “in 2
weeks.” The next step is to then study improvement and act
on its changes. These can be either positive or negative
results, and it is important to recognize that many quality
improvement and patient safety projects can be implemented
in a several-week timeframe, not necessarily months to years.
The IHI has a project charter sheet that we recommend using
for organizing QI plans [22]. When thinking about outcomes,
these are broadly classified into three types [20]:

1. Outcome Measures: These are the primary outcomes, e.g.,
   the number of people washing their hands or the number
   of catheter-associated urinary tract infections, to name a
   few. These are the outcomes relevant to the patients.
2. Process Measures: These involve looking at the individual
   steps of the QI project and how they are being imple-
   mented, e.g., how many people are being audited for
   handwashing.
Chapter 9.   Implementing Quality Improvement at Your…     167

3. Balancing Measures: These refer to an unintentional con-
   sequence that the QI project had, e.g., studying if while
   improving ambulation, the number of patient falls during
   the study period increased.

   The “RE-AIM” method (reach, effectiveness, adoption,
implementation, maintenance), which was originally intro-
duced in 1999, is an effective tool to implement a project
while ensuring to assess the project’s more long-term imple-
mentation into the culture of an institution as opposed to a
temporary change [23, 24]. One can assess outcome, process,
and balancing measures during the implementation phase
and use them to guide the team’s reaction and/or mainte-
nance phase of the project.
   The most important takeaway is that a team’s PDSA cycle
must be quick to adapt and use lessons learned from prior
cycles. If the first implementation cycle of a QI project does
not result in improvement of outcome or process measures,
or if the balancing measures are too great, the team should
not abandon the project but should analyze the process to
identify reasons why success was not attained and then
develop and implement a second plan. Several cycles of plan-
ning and implementation may be necessary to achieve
desired outcomes or minimize balancing measures. Rapid
cycle methodology requires the use of run charts, which can
be used to identify certain trends and guide the next potential
change required [19, 25].
   We will share a project we are implementing at Tulane
Medical Center that we will use moving forward as an exam-
ple. We recognized that the rate of ambulation was extremely
low in our surgical patient population: a dismal 10% were
ambulating at least daily. We set a goal of improving the
ambulation rate by 25% over 2 weeks by using text message
reminders as an inpatient. Our team was led by a resident
leader, with general surgery staff surgeons, nursing leader-
ship, and patients also involved. We tested our change by
sending two text messages a day to these patients and saw a
168   M. Ghio et al.

greater than 50% improvement in ambulation rates among
our patients. Our balancing measure was the number of falls
in the unit; there was no increase in rate of falls in our popula-
tion. Because of its simplicity, ease of implementation, and
success, this has now evolved into a hospital-wide program
aimed at using text messaging to improve various aspects of
patient care.


How to Prevent Quality Improvement Fatigue
Frequently in quality improvement and patient safety areas,
there is either initial success or failure that is then met with
inconsistent follow-up on the project, sometimes with a
decline in implementation. It is important that projects are
not seen as temporary measures or as isolated projects but as
the new norm and standard of care at a hospital. The project’s
success is frequently determined by its resource requirement,
i.e., can it be implemented without constant oversight, a sig-
nificant monetary inflow, or other factors that may be diffi-
cult to maintain longitudinally?
    The strongest projects are those that create a culture of
change, require few new resources, and have proven, trans-
parent results. On a basic level, the importance of constantly
reassessing the PDSA cannot be overstated – quality improve-
ment is defined by the ability to constantly reassess QI mea-
sures, from every day to week to month, and redesign the
PDSA cycle [22]. True QI can be evaluated on a weekly basis
to see if improvements happen then less frequently but still
regularly.
    It is estimated that up to 70% of change through QI is not
sustained, and efforts seen in the United Kingdom showed
that 33% of QI projects were not continued 1 year after
completion [26, 27]. The National Health Service in the
United Kingdom identified ten factors related to process
implementation that if scored could predict sustainability
[27]. These factors include [27]:
Chapter 9.   Implementing Quality Improvement at Your…      169

 1. Are there benefits beyond helping patients (are jobs
    easier)?
 2. Is there credibility of the benefits? Does evidence support
    the change and are the benefits visible?
 3. Is there adaptability of the improved process? Does the
    change rely on a specific individual or group?
 4. Is there effectiveness of the system to monitor progress?
    Are there monitoring systems in place?
 5. Is staff involved in the change and was new staff hired?
 6. Are staff encouraged to express ideas?
 7. Is senior leadership engaged and supportive?
 8. Is clinical leadership engagement and support?
 9. Is there alignment with strategic aim and culture?
10. Is there space and equipment to support change/is infra-
    structure in place?

   We agree that these factors are all important in preventing
quality improvement fatigue and should be examined prior to
implementation. A project is only as useful as its ability to be
continued after initial success, so remaining cognizant of
these factors when designing a patient safety project may
lead to improved implementation.
   Once a QI project has proven successful and implemented
as the new norm, it is important to identify new leaders who
will continue to assess the outcomes and ensure it is being
implemented properly. Oftentimes, this involves inviting men-
tees with an interest in QI to take on a more substantial role
and tasking them with evaluating the project quarterly or at
some regular interval. Engaging residents and students is cru-
cial in learning how to develop collaborative initiatives with
nursing. Helping mentees understand the goal of quality
improvement projects, the fundamental components of design-
ing a project, how their role as a resident is valuable, and the
time commitment have all been shown to improve resident
involvement [28]. IHI modules provide an introduction to the
fundamental topics of quality improvement and patient safety
170   M. Ghio et al.

and are a good stepping stone to helping students and resi-
dents understand the basics of designing a project. There is a
great focus on QI education of residents by the American
College of Surgeons through their development of the Quality
In-Training Initiative (QITI) that aims to create a culture of
change and prioritization of patient safety [25].
   Collaboration and networking between hospitals are
another strategy to minimizing QI fatigue. Hearing from col-
leagues at other hospitals about how they created a culture
change, implemented projects, and sought to identify stake-
holders can ignite passion for QI while providing ideas for
further innovation. It also is advantageous for young sur-
geons and learners as a way to network with experts in the
field.


 linical Areas That Have Established Quality
C
Improvement
Every single surgical field can benefit from QI. Within each
surgical department, there are limitless opportunities – from
preoperative interventions, intraoperative, postoperative, it is
crucial to think about every step of day activity when consid-
ering and evaluating areas that would benefit from QI. These
exist on a local and national level and require collaboration
among providers, whether residents, nurses, attendings, or
others. There are certain QI programs that we want to high-
light that track patient safety information.
   First, the American College of Surgery National Surgical
Quality Improvement Program (NSQIP) is a nationally vali-
dated, risk-adjusted program that allows hospitals to com-
pare themselves with one another in regard to their
complications and is an effective way to gather valuable
information about hospital performance. The NSQIP gener-
ates semiannual reports showing hospitals’ risk-adjusted
Chapter 9.   Implementing Quality Improvement at Your…      171

30-day morbidity and mortality outcomes along with an odds
ratio (1.0 is as expected, >1.0 worse than expected, <1.0 better
than expected). This information can provide real-time feed-
back to hospitals and help identify specific areas for improve-
ment. NSQIP has helped improve the risk-adjusted mortality
and risk-adjusted complication rates, preventing between 250
and 500 complications per year [29].
    There are a number of quality improvement programs that
are specialty specific: Transplant Quality Institute through
United Network for Organ Sharing, Metabolic and Bariatric
Surgery Accreditation and Quality Improvement Program
(MBSAQIP), Trauma Quality Improvement Program (TQIP),
Vascular Quality Initiative (VQI), NSQIP Pediatric, and oth-
ers that we encourage involvement in as these provide useful
ways to compare efforts to others.
    Within a hospital or healthcare system, frequent review of
outcomes in regard to particular departments is a great first
step to identifying areas for improvement as is being aware of
outcomes achieved at other institutions. In these discussions,
it is worthwhile to involve every level of provider and staff to
help identify deficiencies. Polling frontline workers about
potentially weak sections of their departments as they impact
patient outcomes can help delineate areas that need improve-
ment and may identify key stakeholders for a QI project.
Institutional administrators and financial directors can help
discover financially beneficial projects that will provide addi-
tional funding to leverage toward other components of
patient care. Whatever the goal may be, a multidisciplinary
committee is essential to making meaningful change.
Networking between hospitals can provide additional
resources for identifying areas to monitor and types of
improvement to strive for. Openly and candidly discussing
results in regard to individual departments opens the door for
dialogue and identification of either deficiencies or areas of
success that others would benefit from learning from.
172   M. Ghio et al.

 OVID and Quality Improvement: Synchrony
C
in a Dyssynchronous Medical System
In this new COVID-19 world, the importance of QI has
intensified. Finding ways to deliver high-quality care is even
more important than ever so that repetitive exposure to
potentially positive or confirmed positive COVID patients is
avoided. There has been an explosion of quality improvement
efforts, with high-functioning institutions understanding that
efforts must be amplified. Meetings among QI groups should
focus on educating frontline workers with useful skills and
expertise needed to improve the care they are providing,
whether COVID-related or not, to minimize exposure to any
patient or to staff. A focus on designing COVID response
teams, to manage airway, personal protective equipment, and
medications is especially important [30].
   There is a growing need for QI and patient safety in the
COVID-19 era, with the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) recognizing that telehealth programs,
some of which are QI in nature, are essential. In April of 2020,
the FCC released a 200-million-dollar budget dedicated to
promoting telehealth programs that would provide care for
people while reducing exposure of providers to patients [31].
This was an extremely valuable resource that a number of
providers took advantage of across the country.
   In this environment, it is important to have frequent vir-
tual meetings, leverage support staff, and attempt to maxi-
mize the value of in-person interaction with patients when
they do take place. We should be careful not to have frivolous
interactions that put patients, coworkers, family members,
and staff at risk for exposure.


Conclusion
In conclusion, we have stressed the importance of identifying
stakeholders and have provided a guide for implementing a
QI program. The first step is to draw up a comprehensive list
Chapter 9.   Implementing Quality Improvement at Your…             173

of stakeholders, focusing on how the project will impact
stakeholder jobs on a day-to-day basis (i.e., will it eliminate
or add new responsibilities) and how the project will ulti-
mately benefit them (whether financially, improved patient
outcomes, or other motivation). After bringing the team
together, make sure to identify and involve future QI leaders
(residents, nursing, medical students, and others) and imple-
ment the plan-do-study-act cycle. Of critical importance is the
need to respond to both failures and successes – in the case of
failures, it is important to attempt to identify what went
wrong and implement an updated PDSA cycle that addresses
this failure. If a plan resulted in success, the team can move
forward with planning for how implementation will continue
with less oversight. Awareness and prevention of QI fatigue
are essential to sustain long-term results.
   Prior to COVID-19, there was a thirst for quality improve-
ment and patient safety projects – now, more so than ever,
there is a need for creative methods to impact meaningful
patient care given the limitations of current patient care
given the ongoing pandemic. Developing projects that
improve patient outcomes and motivate them to be active
participants in their care is crucial.


References
1. The President’s Advisory Commission on Consumer Protection
   and Quality in the Health Care Industry: report synopsis -
   PubMed. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10179021/. Accessed
   2 Oct 2020.
2. Kohn LT, Corrigan JM, Donaldson MS. To err is human.
   Building a safer health system, volume 6, vol. 2; 1999. https://doi.
   org/10.17226/9728.
3. Mission and Budget. Agency for health research and quality.
   https://www.ahrq.gov/cpi/about/mission/index.html. Accessed 25
   Sept 2020.
4. Institute of Medicine (US) Committee on Quality of Health
   Care in America. Shaping the future; crossing the quality chasm:
   a new health system for the 21th century. 2001. https://doi.
   org/10.17226/10027
174       M. Ghio et al.

 5. Stelfox HT, Palmisani S, Scurlock C, Orav EJ, Bates DW. The “To
    Err is Human” report and the patient safety literature. BMJ Qual
    Saf. 2006;15(3):174–8. https://doi.org/10.1136/qshc.2006.017947.
 6. NQF: List of SREs. http://www.qualityforum.org/Topics/SREs/
    List_of_SREs.aspx. Accessed 2 Oct 2020.
 7. Gold JA. The 100,000 lives campaign. WMJ. 2005;104(8):81–2.
    https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.295.3.324.
 8. Outcome Measures. CMS. https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/
    Q u a l i t y-­I n i t i a t i v e s -­Pa t i e n t -­A s s e s s m e n t -­I n s t r u m e n t s /
    HospitalQualityInits/OutcomeMeasures. Accessed 2 Oct 2020.
 9. Tablan OC, Anderson LJ, Besser R, et al. Guidelines for prevent-
    ing health-care--associated pneumonia, 2003: recommendations
    of CDC and the Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory
    Committee. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2004;53(RR-3):1–36. http://
    www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15048056.
10. American Thoracic Society; Infectious Diseases Society of
    America. Guidelines for the management of adults with hospital-­
    acquired, ventilator-associated, and healthcare-associated pneu-
    monia. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2005;171(4):388–416. https://
    doi.org/10.1164/rccm.200405-­644ST.
11. Baehrend J. 100,000 lives campaign: ten years later. http://www.
    ihi.org/communities/blogs/100000-­lives-­campaign-­ten-­years-­
    later. Published 2016.
12. McKee C, Berkowitz I, Cosgrove SE, et al. Reduction of catheter-­
    associated bloodstream infections in pediatric patients: experi-
    mentation and reality. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2008;9(1):40–6.
    https://doi.org/10.1097/01.PCC.0000299821.46193.A3.
13. Haynes AB, Weiser TG, Berry WR, et al. A surgical safety
    checklist to reduce morbidity and mortality in a global popula-
    tion. N Engl J Med. 2009;360(5):491–9. https://doi.org/10.1056/
    NEJMsa0810119.
14. National Quality Forum (NQF). Serious reportable events in
    healthcare—2011 update: a consensus report. Washington, DC:
    National Quality Forum (NQF); 2011.
15. Birkmeyer JD, Dimick JB, Birkmeyer NJO. Measuring the
    quality of surgical care: structure, process, or outcomes? J
    Am Coll Surg. 2004;198(4):626–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
    jamcollsurg.2003.11.017.
16. Tichansky DS, Morton J, Jones DB, editors. The SAGES manual
    of quality, outcomes and patient safety. New York: Springer;
    2012. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-­1-­4419-­7901-­8.
Chapter 9.   Implementing Quality Improvement at Your…            175

17. Engaging stakeholders to improve the quality of children’s
    health care. Agency for Health Research and Quality. https://
    www.ahrq.gov/policymakers/chipra/demoeval/what-­w e-­
    learned/implementation-­guides/implementation-­guide1/index.
    html#about. Accessed 2 Oct 2020.
18. Rosen DH, Johnson S, Kebaabetswe P, Thigpen M, Smith
    DK. Process maps in clinical trial quality assurance. Clin Trials.
    2009;6(4):373–7. https://doi.org/10.1177/1740774509338429.
19. Silver SA, McQuillan R, Harel Z, et al. How to sustain
    change and support continuous quality improvement. Clin J
    Am Soc Nephrol. 2016;11(5):916–24. https://doi.org/10.2215/
    CJN.11501015.
20. Silver SA, Harel Z, McQuillan R, et al. How to begin a quality
    improvement project. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2016;11(5):893–
    900. https://doi.org/10.2215/CJN.11491015.
21. Langley GL, Moen R, Nolan KM, Nolan TW, Norman CLPL. The
    improvement guide: a practical approach to enhancing orga-
    nizational performance. 2nd ed. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass
    Publishers; 2009.
22. Plan-Do-Study-Act (PDSA) Worksheet. IHI - Institute for
    Healthcare Improvement. http://www.ihi.org/resources/Pages/
    Tools/PlanDoStudyActWorksheet.aspx. Accessed 2 Oct 2020.
23. Glasgow RE, Vogt TM, Boles SM. Evaluating the public
    health impact of health promotion interventions: the RE-AIM
    framework. Am J Public Health. 1999;89(9):1322–7. https://doi.
    org/10.2105/AJPH.89.9.1322.
24. Gaglio B, Shoup JA, Glasgow RE. The RE-AIM framework:
    a systematic review of use over time. Am J Public Health.
    2013;103(6). https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2013.301299.
25. (No Title). https://qiti.acsnsqip.org/ACS_NSQIP_2017_QITI_
    Curriculum.pdf. Accessed 2 Oct 2020.
26. Beer M, Nohria N. Cracking the code of change. Harv Bus
    Rev. 2000;78(3):133–41, 216. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
    pubmed/11183975.
27. Lennox L, Maher L, Reed J. Navigating the sustainability land-
    scape: a systematic review of sustainability approaches in health-
    care. Implement Sci. 2018;13(1):1–17. https://doi.org/10.1186/
    s13012-­0 17-­0707-­4.
28. Butler JM, Anderson KA, Supiano MA, Weir CR. “It feels like
    a lot of extra work”: resident attitudes about quality improve-
    ment and implications for an effective learning health care
176   M. Ghio et al.

    system. Acad Med. 2017;92(7):984–90. https://doi.org/10.1097/
    ACM.0000000000001474.
29. Hall BL, Hamilton BH, Richards K, Bilimoria KY,
    Cohen ME, Ko CY. Does surgical quality improve in the
    American College of Surgeons National Surgical Quality
    Improvement Program: an evaluation of all participating hos-
    pitals. Ann Surg. 2009;250(3):363–74. https://doi.org/10.1097/
    SLA.0b013e3181b4148f.
30. Oesterreich S, Cywinski JB, Elo B, Geube M, Mathur P. Quality
    improvement during the COVID-19 pandemic. Cleve Clin J
    Med. 2020. https://doi.org/10.3949/ccjm.87a.ccc041.
31. COVID-19 Telehealth Program. Federal Communications
    Commission. https://www.fcc.gov/covid-­19-­telehealth-­program.
    Accessed 2 Oct 2020.
Chapter 10
Creating and Defining
Quality Metrics That
Matter in Surgery
Anai N. Kothari and Thomas A. Aloia




 reating and Defining Quality Metrics That
C
Matter in Surgery
In March of 2013, Kirk Goldsberry and Eric Weiss introduced
“The Dwight Effect” at the MIT Sports Analytics Conference.
At that point, the NBA lagged behind other professional
sports leagues in the adoption of advanced analytic tech-
niques to evaluate in-game performance [1]. This was espe-
cially true for defensive performance, which was difficult to
measure and effectively characterize. Since basketball has
two key objectives – scoring points and preventing points –


A. N. Kothari
Department of Surgery, Division of Surgical Oncology, Medical
College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, USA
e-mail: akothari@mcw.edu
T. A. Aloia (*)
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX, USA
e-mail: thomas.aloia@ascension.org

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature     177
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_10
178   A. N. Kothari and T. A. Aloia

not being able to assess the latter was a significant shortcom-
ing. By combining optical tracking data with visual and
spatial analytics, Goldsberry and Weiss were able to reframe
how defense in the NBA could be measured [2, 3].
   “The Dwight Effect” was the foundation for a new set of
advanced defensive metrics that have since led to a transfor-
mation in the way basketball is played in the NBA [4].
However, it was not simply creating new metrics that led to
this impact – the NBA was already awash in static measures
of performance. Instead, insights were obtained by using a
deeper understanding of the interaction of the players to
identify novel independent variables that better correlated to
performance outcomes. Creating and defining quality metrics
“that matter” in surgery should have similar focus.
   In healthcare, quality metrics are used in multiple ways.
From benchmarking to quality improvement efforts to public
reporting to reimbursement, quality measures are crucial to
support assessment and improvement at the provider, hospi-
tal, system, and societal level. Particularly relevant to sur-
geons, the measurement movement has motivated hospitals
and regulatory bodies to transparently report metrics that
attempt to measure high-quality surgery. However, attempts
to simply apply existing healthcare quality metrics to surgery
are limited by inadequate adjustment of risk and incomplete
consideration of the unique aspects of perioperative care. As
a result, there is a strong incentive for surgeons to move from
the sidelines to the playing field when it comes to quality
measure design [5].
   In this chapter, we introduce aspects of surgical care that
can be measured and what data are available to create met-
rics. We then describe a framework for identifying quality
metrics in surgery that matter to patients and providers and
the key steps for creating/defining these metrics. Finally, we
provide a design tool to create new metrics for surgical
application.
     Chapter 10. Creating and Defining Quality Metrics…        179

 rom Measuring Surgical Care to Designing
F
Metrics
Approaching metric construction from a design-thinking per-
spective, the end goal of all measures is quantifying value to
achieve the “quadruple aim” (improving patient experience,
improving health of populations, reducing the per capita cost
of healthcare, and improving the well-being of healthcare
providers) [6, 7]. The traditional value equation accounts for
outcomes and cost. We propose a modified value equation
that further specifies the numerator by accounting for both
quality (achieving a positive outcome) and safety (avoidance
of harm) (Fig. 10.1) [5]. This can provide a foundation for
identifying the inputs necessary to develop new surgical
metrics.


                         Quality        –      Safety/Harm
 Value      =

                                       Cost




      Safety/Harm                             Quality



 T
 r
 e
 a
 t
 m
 e
 n
 t



Figure 10.1 A framework for developing metrics for surgeons and
surgical patients that emphasizes the pursuit of high value care by
accounting for quality, safety/harm, and cost. (Aloia et al. [5])
180    A. N. Kothari and T. A. Aloia

Quality

In 1966, Donabedian introduced a conceptual model for the
assessment of quality. Donabedian proposed three major cri-
teria of quality in medical care – structure, process, and out-
comes. Each Donabedian component interacts with and
influences the next, where structure is defined as the setting
where care occurs, process refers to how care is delivered, and
outcomes refer to the impact of care [8]. Of these, outcomes
are seemingly the most important. However, while some
­outcomes like mortality are unmistakable, others can be less
 clear, making them challenging to specify. This has led to a
 reliance on using structural and process measures to define
 surgical quality metrics [9].
     Existing surgical quality metrics can be grouped based on
 the Donabedian framework. Postoperative mortality, compli-
 cations, length of stay, and readmission are outcome indica-
 tors. Adherence to components of enhanced recovery after
 surgery programs and surgical care improvement project
 (SCIP) measures are examples of commonly used process
 indicators. Hospital and surgeon volume, nursing ratios, and
 external designations/accreditations are each structural indi-
 cators [10]. In the design of new metrics, using the Donabedian
 model can provide a template to organize these efforts.
 Balancing metric value with the work required to obtain data,
 it is recommended that measure sets contain a balanced port-
 folio of structure, process, and outcomes measures.
     Data that can be used to define quality metrics are avail-
 able through multiple existing internal and external sources.
 While impossible to detail all possible data sources, we
 ­highlight four major resources: clinical records, registries, bill-
  ing data/claims, and federal agencies/programs.
     Donabedian recognized the important role clinical records
  play in the assessment of quality. Specifically, patient records
  provide a narrative summary of how structure, process, and
  outcomes come together to impact individual patients.
  However, concerns surrounded their use due to incomplete-
  ness and inaccuracy. Many of these concerns have amplified
    Chapter 10. Creating and Defining Quality Metrics…      181

with the transition to the routine use of electronic clinical
records [11]. While the electronic health record (EHR) comes
with significant promise in the ability to obtain relevant qual-
ity improvement data given the availability of electronic
documentation, prescription and test information, diagnos-
tics, and many other elements, it is subject to inaccuracies
during data entry [12]. Still, electronic health data are an
important input to the design of quality metrics.
   Clinical registries and databases provide important data
for surgeons to use for designing quality metrics. These
include institutional databases, local and regional collabora-
tive data-sharing programs, and national datasets that aggre-
gate outcome, process, and structural data [13]. Examples
such as the American College of Surgeon’s NSQIP program,
the Michigan Bariatric Collaborative, and the ACS/NCI’s
National Care Database provide aggregated data that can be
used to measure quality.
   Several federal agencies and programs have been estab-
lished to measure and report on the quality of care, including
surgical quality [14]. The Center for Medicare and Medicaid
Services (CMS) has several quality programs. These include
CAHPS (Consumer Assessment of Healthcare Providers and
Systems), Hospital Compare, and the Hospital Inpatient
Quality Reporting Program (IQR). Another is the Agency of
Health Quality and Research (AHRQ) that has developed
several quality indicators, including prevention quality indi-
cators (PQI), inpatient quality indicators (IQI), and patient
safety indicators (PSI) [15]. While these are all established
quality metrics in their own right, they can also provide a
source of data to develop new metrics and adapt for local use.


Safety

Quality is not the only aspect of care that contributes to the
numerator of the value equation. Quality closely interacts
with safety – together, determining an outcome. Unlike more
well-defined models for measuring health quality, no univer-
182   A. N. Kothari and T. A. Aloia

sal approach exists for measuring patient safety. Instead, the
focus is on “zero harm” or the avoidance of a negative out-
come [16]. Interestingly, most measures that are labeled as
surgical quality metrics are better defined as harm metrics. In
fact, 95% of publicly reportable metrics in healthcare are
harm metrics. For example, postoperative wound infections,
deep vein thrombosis, pneumonia, and others are all harm
events. Preventing these occurrences, when viewed in the
context of the modified value equation, incompletely achieves
the aim of high-value care, since they do directly incentivize
surgeons to strive for higher-quality/positive outcomes.
    There are other collateral damages that can arise from
focusing solely on harm metrics including impaired patient
access, arrested innovation, challenges in training, and sur-
geon burnout [17]. Harm metrics can lead to perceived high-­
risk patients not receiving the same care as their lower-risk
counterparts. This is seen across multiple specialties where
publicly reported metrics appear to influence decisions for
offering surgical treatment [18]. Similarly, in an attempt to
avoid harm and promote safety, the process for developing,
testing, and implementing new techniques can be slowed [19].
For surgeons that are primarily being measured using harm
metrics, there is a potential disincentive to educate and pro-
vide trainees the necessary autonomy to help them develop
toward their own future independent practice. Finally, the
emphasis on harm metrics can contribute to surgeon burn-
out – few enter surgical practice motivated to avoid harm but
instead are intrinsically driven to achieve high quality.
Therefore, creating metrics centered on achieving quality
might have advantage over those focused on preventing harm
[17]. Optimally, metrics that strive to improve quality while
also mitigating harm should be prioritized. Ultimately,
­developing a balanced portfolio of harm and quality mea-
 sures is more likely to achieve higher levels of value
 realization.
    Chapter 10. Creating and Defining Quality Metrics…      183

Cost

The third element and the denominator of the value equation
is cost. Measurement of cost quantifies the financial burden
associated with rendering a healthcare service, usually in a
single episode of care. The challenge in measurement of cost
is that it is an opaque term and can describe several items
including patient out-of-pocket payments, charges, prices,
provision of care costs, indirect costs, and acquisition costs.
We propose a framework that focuses on three “real-dollar”
domains: [1] patient-borne cost, [2] third-party payors, and [3]
institutional cost [20].
   Patient-borne cost summarizes the direct and indirect
expenses taken on by patients for the care they receive. For
example, out-of-pocket costs can be estimated by using
copays and deductibles. These direct expenses can be assessed
using patient-level billing data. Another type of cost incurred
by the patient is indirect and more difficult to assess.
Examples of indirect patient costs include lost wages and
travel costs. Third-party payor costs focus on reimbursement
contributions from insurance companies or governmental
health plans. Characterizing and measuring these can be com-
plex, particularly before the initiation of treatment due to
lack of transparency into, plan maximums, charge to reim-
bursement ratios, stop loss provisions, and other differences
in third-party contracts. However, post-therapy accounting
has become more transparent as penetration of electronic
billing platforms embedded in electronic health records has
increased access to precise payor funds flow data. Institutional
cost includes all of the procurement and production expenses
to provision care, such as equipment, pharmacy, staff, services,
time, infrastructure, information technology, and many other
inputs, both direct and indirect.
184   A. N. Kothari and T. A. Aloia

Checklist for Creating Surgical Metrics
As described, the volume of data available to surgeons con-
tinues to grow at an exponential pace and comes from mul-
tiple sources. Data alone, however, do not lead to actual
insight, change, and improvement. Instead, data must be
translated into usable metrics. This process can be facilitated
using a consistent framework. This level of standardization
has the advantage of avoiding the temptation to create
unneeded and redundant metrics – which is a common prac-
tice when faced with increasing available data streams [6].
   Several national groups including the National Quality
Forum (NQF), CMS, and Physician Consortium for
Performance Enhancement (PCPI) have developed guiding
principles for developing new measures. Leveraging the
expertise of these regulatory organizations can help ensure
the creation of high-quality surgical metrics. CMS has formu-
lated a standardized approach that is used across all of the
agency’s quality programs and initiatives [21]. This blueprint
can be broken down into five stages: conceptualization, speci-
fication, testing, implementation, and evaluation (Fig. 10.2).


Conceptualization

The initial step to developing a new surgical metric is consid-
ering how it will enhance the healthcare system [22]. High-­
quality metrics should be meaningful to multiple stakeholders
including providers, administrators, and patients. To accom-
plish this, focusing on high-impact areas with real opportunity
for improvement is essential. Other considerations include
minimizing the burden on providers to both use and collect
the measure, prioritizing electronic data to specify the metric,
reducing care delivery disparities, and aligning the metric
with other quality improvement programs (both local and
national) [23].
    Chapter 10. Creating and Defining Quality Metrics…          185




                     Conceptualization




                          Specification




                                   Testing




                          Implementation




                          Evaluation




Figure 10.2 A checklist for developing surgical quality metrics that
matter

    The conceptualization phase includes information gather-
ing, engaging subject and content experts, and a public
­comment process. Information gathering is arguably the most
 important step of the entire process and focuses on obtaining
 data that will eventually be used to justify the metric’s imple-
 mentation. This requires a comprehensive literature search
 and understanding what existing clinical guidelines are
 already in place. The focus should be on creating a metric that
 leads to better population health, better care, and/or more
 affordable care [24].
186   A. N. Kothari and T. A. Aloia

Specification

Following conceptualization, the next step is specifying the
measure. This includes detailing the elements of the metric,
defining the type of metric, and determining necessary data
sources. Both CMS and NQF outline that quality measures
should include a title/description, numerator, denominator,
exclusions, and rationale [21].
   As an example, the NQF-endorsed quality measure “peri-
operative temperature management” illustrates how to apply
these principles to quality metric specification.
   The title/description of the perioperative temperature
management measure is “Percentage of patients, regardless of
age, who undergo surgical or therapeutic procedures under
general or neuraxial anesthesia of 60 minutes duration or
longer for whom at least one body temperature greater than
or equal to 35.5 degrees Celsius (or 95.9 degrees Fahrenheit)
was achieved within the 30 minutes immediately before or
the 15 minutes immediately after anesthesia end time.” Title/
descriptions should clearly describe the population of inter-
est and specify the objective [25].
   The numerator for perioperative temperature manage-
ment is “Patients for whom at least one body temperature
greater than or equal to 35.5 degrees Celsius (or 95.9 degrees
Fahrenheit) was achieved within the 30 minutes immediately
before or the 15 minutes immediately after anesthesia end
time.” Numerators specify what is necessary to achieve com-
pliance with the measure.
   The denominator for perioperative temperature manage-
ment is “All patients, regardless of age, who undergo surgical
or therapeutic procedures under general or neuraxial anes-
thesia of 60 minutes duration or longer.” The denominator
exclusions are “monitored anesthesia care and peripheral
nerve block.” Quality measure denominators describe the
total population a metric will be applicable to and highlight
those excluded from the measure.
   Specifying the metric also involves identifying the neces-
sary data sources to calculate the measure. Measures can be
    Chapter 10. Creating and Defining Quality Metrics…      187

based on a single source or multiple sources of data inputs
including administrative data, electronic clinical data, stan-
dardized patient assessments, medical records, surveys, and
registries.


Testing

Prior to launch, a rigorous assessment of the technical and
scientific merit of the measure should be conducted [21]. This
is based on four general criteria: importance, scientific
acceptability, feasibility, and usability. During this stage,
exploration of data collection in a real-world setting is
reviewed. Can the data actually be collected? Does collecting
data for the metric create substantial hardship (financial cost,
number of people needed to maintain the data, etc.)? And,
most importantly, does the data being collected measure what
was intended? The testing phase is often iterative and
requires multiple cycles prior to moving on to the next stage.


Implementation
The implementation stage includes endorsement and com-
plete rollout of the new metric. There are multiple consensus
groups that can endorse a new metric including national
organizations (ACS, NQF), specialty societies, and local/
regional groups. The endorsement process can be long and
happen in parallel to the actual rollout of a new measure.
   Rollout planning includes preparing for audit and valida-
tion, provider education, and pilot programs. In fact, the
implementation stage is primarily an education phase –
where developers ensure end users understand the purpose
of the measure and how to use it. Pilot programs offer a
gradual rollout and can help provide feedback from stake-
holders using the measure to further improve u       ­sability/
compliance.
188   A. N. Kothari and T. A. Aloia

Evaluation

The final stage in metric creation includes the actual use of
the measure, ensuring a process for evaluation, and continued
maintenance. While a tremendous amount of energy and
effort are required to place a new surgical metric into prac-
tice, that is just the beginning of the process. The most impact-
ful and consistently used metrics are subject to constant
scrutiny. This ensures they remain receptive to changes in
literature, public feedback, and maintain scientific validity.
Above all, the evaluation phase challenges all metrics to
remain relevant and promote quality improvement.
    Evaluation of new metrics includes active, ongoing infor-
mation surveillance. This is similar to the information gather-
ing conducted during development. Many surgical metrics
are example of this. For instance, the Surgical Care
Improvement Project (SCIP) was developed as a national
program to help improve surgical care. SCIP developed sev-
eral performance measures to help reduce surgical site infec-
tions, cardiovascular complications, venous thromboembolism,
and respiratory complications [26]. Following broad imple-
mentation, many of the SCIP measures were studied to
understand if they were actually achieving their intended aim
[27]. While they may have contributed to improve surgical
care, over time the adherence to the metrics was close to
100% making the impact of the measures difficult to inter-
pret. Ultimately, this ongoing evaluation translated to change,
and the SCIP measures were retired in 2015.
    Other important considerations during the continued
evaluation phase include reassessing the data collected (are
there better ways or improved data inputs?), comparisons to
other similar measures (are there places of overlap?), and
maintenance reviews (should the metric be retained, revised,
retired, suspended, removed?).
    Chapter 10. Creating and Defining Quality Metrics…              189

 odel for Patient-Centric Surgical Outcome
M
Measure Development
A possible way to facilitate the conceptualization of new
metrics is through surgical societies. These groups are preas-
sembled expert panels and include stakeholders with signifi-
cant domain expertise. To aid in this process, a structured
template can be helpful to allow individuals that may not
have formal training in measure development an opportunity
to actively participate. We developed a novel tool that lever-
ages the components of the modified value equation to
inform the discussion (Table 10.1) [5]. This tool separates
patient-centered outcomes into the following domains: safety/
harm, quality, short-term utility/disutility, long-term utility/
disutility. Use of this tool has been shown to rapidly produce
focused procedure-specific metric sets that can be refined
through fit testing with patients [5].


Table 10.1 A tool for the development of new surgical quality
metrics
Relevance: Is it a meaningful measure that identifies potential
for improvements?
Scientific soundness: Is it a scientifically valid, accurate, and
reproducible measure? Is there clinical evidence to support its
use? Can it provide a process–outcome link?
Feasibility: Is it fiscally and logistically workable? Can it
be precisely specified and conducted within confidentiality
parameters? Is it auditable?
Comprehensiveness: How extensive is the information yielded
through the measure?
Quality metric: Survival, resolution of symptoms, and/or degree
of recovery
1. Select a procedure
2. List the most common diagnoses that indicate that procedure
                                                           (continued)
190    A. N. Kothari and T. A. Aloia

Table 10.1 (continued)
3. Symptom burden: Describe the most common symptoms
    patients with those diagnoses present with
4. Life interference: Of the symptoms in #3, list 2–3 that are the
    most disabling to the patient (ability to eat, walk, work, care
    for self, care for others, enjoy life)
5. Circle the symptoms in #4 that improve/resolve with a
    “technically successful” procedure in more than 50% of cases
6. Write a metric that addresses one of the circled items
7. Define metric failure
Safety metric: Short-term complication (including readmission)
8. List the 3              9. List the median            10. Multiply
    most common                 complication grade              across,
    30-day surgical             that occurs with each           then
    complications for           complication: 5 – death;        circle
    the procedure               4 – organ failure, ICU;         the row
                                3 – rescue procedure            with the
                                (IR or OR); 2 – medical         highest
                                management at                   number
                                bedside; 1 – no specific
                                intervention)
First most common (5points)
Second most common (3 points)
Third most common (1 point)
11. Write a metric that addresses the circled item
12. Define metric failure
Safety metric: Long-term disutility
13. List the most common surgically induced disability present
     at 6–12 months postoperatively
14. Write a metric that addresses the item
15. Define metric failure
Aloia et al. [5]
    Chapter 10. Creating and Defining Quality Metrics…           191

Conclusion
The perfect surgical metric is likely unattainable. However,
creating and defining metrics that matter is a worthwhile
effort for surgeons to engage in. With ongoing external pres-
sure for transparent reporting, ensuring surgical metrics are
meaningful is of paramount importance. Surgical leadership
in developing, specifying, and implementing new measures is
crucial. As seen in both healthcare and non-healthcare appli-
cations, performance metrics have important consequences –
they can reshape the game. A systematic and rigorous
approach to metric development can provide assurance that
any resultant changes are for the better.


References
1. Goldsberry K, Weiss E. The Dwight effect: a new ensemble of
   interior defense analytics for the NBA. Sports Aptitude, LLC
   Web 2013;1–11.
2. Franks A, Miller A, Bornn L, Goldsberry K. Counterpoints:
   advanced defensive metrics for nba basketball [Internet]. In:
   9th annual MIT Sloan sports analytics conference, Boston, MA.
   lukebornn.com; 2015. Available from: http://www.lukebornn.
   com/papers/franks_ssac_2015.pdf.
3. Sampaio J, McGarry T, Calleja-González J, Jiménez Sáiz S,
   Schelling I Del Alcázar X, Balciunas M. Exploring game
   ­performance in the national basketball association using player
    tracking data. PLoS One. 2015;10(7):e0132894.
4. Verrier J. You can’t stop NBA offenses—and now, you can’t
    even Hope to contain them [Internet]. The Ringer. 2018 [cited
    2020 Nov 29]. Available from: https://www.theringer.com/
    nba/2018/10/30/18038802/nba-­defense-­offensive-­boom.
5. Aloia TA, Jackson T, Ghaferi A, Dort J, Schwarz E, Romanelli
    J. Developing minimally invasive procedure quality metrics: one
    step at a time. Surg Endosc. 2019;33(3):679–83.
6. Henry LR, von Holzen UW, Minarich MJ, et al. Quality mea-
    surement affecting surgical practice: utility versus utopia. Am J
    Surg. 2018;215(3):357–66.
192    A. N. Kothari and T. A. Aloia

 7. Bodenheimer T, Sinsky C. From triple to quadruple aim: care
    of the patient requires care of the provider. Ann Fam Med.
    2014;12(6):573–6.
 8. Berwick D, Fox DM. “Evaluating the quality of medical
    care”: Donabedian’s classic article 50 years later. Milbank Q.
    2016;94(2):237.
 9. Birkmeyer JD, Dimick JB, Birkmeyer NJO. Measuring the qual-
    ity of surgical care: structure, process, or outcomes? J Am Coll
    Surg. 2004;198(4):626–32.
10. Merkow RP, Bilimoria KY, Ko CY. Surgical quality measure-
    ment: an evolving science. JAMA Surg. 2013;148(7):586–7.
11. Tang PC, Ralston M, Arrigotti MF, Qureshi L, Graham
    J. Comparison of methodologies for calculating quality mea-
    sures based on administrative data versus clinical data from an
    electronic health record system: implications for performance
    measures. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2007;14(1):10–5.
12. Chan KS, Fowles JB, Weiner JP. Electronic health records and
    the reliability and validity of quality measures: a review of the
    literature. Med Care Res Rev. 2010;67(5):503–27.
13. Stey AM, Russell MM, Ko CY, Sacks GD, Dawes AJ, Gibbons
    MM. Clinical registries and quality measurement in surgery: a
    systematic review. Surgery. 2015;157(2):381–95.
14. Burstin H, Leatherman S, Goldmann D. The evolution of health-
    care quality measurement in the United States. J Intern Med.
    2016;279(2):154–9.
15. Elixhauser A, Pancholi M, Clancy CM. Using the AHRQ qual-
    ity indicators to improve health care quality. Jt Comm J Qual
    Patient Saf. 2005;31(9):533–8.
16. Thomas EJ. The harms of promoting “Zero Harm”. BMJ Qual
    Saf. 2020;29(1):4–6.
17. Aloia TA. Should zero harm be our goal? Ann Surg.
    2020;271(1):33.
18. Shahian DM, Jacobs JP, Badhwar V, D’Agostino RS, Bavaria JE,
    Prager RL. Risk aversion and public reporting. Part 1: observa-
    tions from cardiac surgery and interventional cardiology. Ann
    Thorac Surg. 2017;104(6):2093–101.
19. Marcus RK, Lillemoe HA, Caudle AS, et al. Facilitation of sur-
    gical innovation: is it possible to speed the introduction of new
    technology while simultaneously improving patient safety? Ann
    Surg. 2019;270(6):937–41.
20. Porter ME, Kaplan RS, Frigo ML. Managing healthcare costs
    and value. Strategic Finance [Internet]; 2017. Available from:
       Chapter 10. Creating and Defining Quality Metrics…                                   193

      http://search.proquest.com/openview/0147acbebd6fb625f241bcf
      9b3a60f77/1?pq-­origsite=gscholar&cbl=48426.
21.   Centers For Medicare & Medicaid Services. Blueprint for the
      CMS measures management system. 2017.
22.   Conceptualization [Internet]. [cited 2020 Nov 27].
      Available from: https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Quality-­
      I n i t i a t i v e s -­Pa t i e n t -­A s s e s s m e n t -­I n s t r u m e n t s / M M S /
      MSP-­Conceptualization.
23.   Krishnan M, Brunelli SM, Maddux FW, et al. Guiding principles
      and checklist for population-based quality metrics. Clin J Am
      Soc Nephrol. 2014;9(6):1124–31.
24.   McGlynn EA, Adams JL. What makes a good quality measure?
      JAMA. 2014;312(15):1517–8.
25.   National Quality Forum Measure. Perioperative temperature
      management – national quality strategy domain: patient safety –
      meaningful measure area: preventable healthcare harm. Quality
      ID #424 (NQF 2681) [Internet] 2018. Available from: https://
      qpp.cms.gov/docs/QPP_quality_measure_specifications/CQM-­
      Measures/2019_Measure_424_MIPSCQM.pdf.
26.   Stulberg JJ, Delaney CP, Neuhauser DV, Aron DC, Fu P,
      Koroukian SM. Adherence to surgical care improvement proj-
      ect measures and the association with postoperative infections.
      JAMA. 2010;303(24):2479–85.
27.   Fry DE. Surgical site infections and the surgical care improve-
      ment project (SCIP): evolution of national quality measures.
      Surg Infect. 2008;9(6):579–84.
Chapter 11
The Role of Surgical
Societies in Quality
Benjamin J. Flink and Aurora D. Pryor



Surgical societies have a great ability to galvanize change and
help ensure quality outcomes for our patients by leveraging
both the knowledge of their members and disseminating
guidance, education and knowledge to members to assist in
reaching quality outcomes on a broader scale. In fact, the mis-
sion statement of SAGES directly addresses quality and is to
“innovate, educate, and collaborate to improve patient care”
[1] . There are four main ways that a surgical society can help
to direct changes to improve the quality of care for surgical
patients: (1) clinical guidelines for surgeons and medical pro-
fessions, (2) direct education and/or certification of surgeons,
(3) creation and funding of research and/or quality improve-
ment infrastructure, and (4) education and outreach to non-
medical professionals and lay people (Fig. 11.1).
   For many, the obvious way that a surgical society can con-
tribute to quality is in the form of clinical guidelines. There
are a great multitude of guidelines in a vast number of spe-
cialties and subspecialties both in surgery and in the medical


B. J. Flink · A. D. Pryor (*)
Stony Brook University Department of Surgery, Division of
Bariatric, Foregut, and Advanced Gastrointestinal Surgery,
Stony Brook, NY, USA
e-mail: Aurora.Pryor@stonybrookmedicine.edu

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature   195
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_11
196    B. J. Flink and A. D. Pryor




Figure 11.1 The roles of surgical societies in quality

realm. It is difficult for the average surgeon in practice to
synthesize the broad scope of new literature and appropri-
ately update their practice to deliver the most relevant
evidence-­based care. Society-based guidelines are an effec-
tive way to synthesize surgical literature into the most salient
points for clinical practice.
   Guidelines play an important role in helping to ensure
quality outcomes for our patients through multiple avenues
including a synthesis of research, expert opinion when data is
limited, as well as providing a template that can be used for
reproducing quality care. At their core, guidelines function in
discouraging interventions and practices that are ineffective,
while simultaneously encouraging those that are either
proven or felt to be effective based on best available evidence
or, at a minimum, expert opinion [2]. Therefore, guidelines
are often an important step in defining what is a standard of
care as well as, in some cases, what is a quality outcome.
   The importance of society involvement with guidelines is
magnified in surgical practice, as there are often many studies
that are limited in level of evidence by study design. Often
there is a lack of randomized control trials and studies may
be retrospective in design or due to relatively rare diseases. In
this situation, expert opinions available through a surgical
society rise in importance of guideline development.
Furthermore, housing the guidelines inside of a large organi-
zation such as a surgical society allows for rapid renewal of
existing guidelines by utilizing its large group of experts.
    Chapter 11.   The Role of Surgical Societies in Quality   197

   While implementation of guidelines can vary, they play an
increasingly prominent role in dissemination of best practice
guidance from organizations such as SAGES to surgeons
around the globe [3, 4]. This process can be expensive, and
SAGES is implementing a standard operating procedure for
guideline development that will maximize the quality and
minimize the production expense of these guidelines [5]. In
so doing, SAGES is focusing on a rigorous review of available
evidence by volunteer surgeons on a given topic that allows
for inclusion of randomized control trials, when available, but
also using other sources of data in a regimented way allows
for high-quality guidelines that seek to provide the best, unbi-
ased evidence on a particular subject. What allows for the
efficient and timely compilation of these guidelines is the
connections and expertise that are contained within the
SAGES leadership and members. Surgical societies in general
are frequently involved with guidelines related to their area
of clinical practice, and these play a large role in guiding the
practice of surgical subspecialties with regard to what the
standard of care is on a given disease process.
   Direct education of surgeons and trainees is a very impor-
tant role for surgical societies. These range from society meet-
ings that help to share the most current research or relevant
lectures to members to certifications such as Advanced
Trauma Life Support (ATLS) from the American College of
Surgeons (ACS) or the Fundamentals of Laparoscopic
Surgery (FLS)/Fundamentals of Endoscopic Surgery
(FES)/Fundamental Use of Surgical Energy (FUSE) pro-
grams that are administered through SAGES. These certifica-
tions allow for a formal testing of basic principles of surgical
care as they pertain to ensuring mastery of foundational
material in laparoscopic and endoscopic surgery. In so doing,
they help to maintain a minimum quality standard with
regard to the implementation of surgical technologies and
skills. These tests also help form the basis of eligibility
requirements for taking the American Board of Surgery
examinations and are central to achieving and maintaining
board certification.
198   B. J. Flink and A. D. Pryor

    Societies can also contribute to the spectrum of surgical
education and certification in other unique ways. SAGES has
already been intimately involved with the formation and
maintenance of the Fellowship Council which supports fel-
lowship training in several areas of GI surgery. SAGES has
led the efforts for training in minimally invasive surgery and
surgical endoscopy. SAGES has also recently partnered with
the SSAT and ASMBS to lead a new fellowship designation
in foregut surgery. These fellowships allow for more standard-
ized training in advanced surgical techniques.
    Recently, the American Board of Medical Specialties has
recognized that there are distinct areas of clinical specializa-
tion beyond an initial certificate. Focused practice designa-
tions (FPDs) were first introduced by the American Board of
Medical Specialties and “recogniz[e] the value that physicians
who focus some or all their practice within a specific area of
a specialty and/or subspecialty can provide to improving
health care” [6]. FPDs will soon be offered through American
Board of Surgery (ABS) for certified surgeons in specific
clinical areas, such as bariatric surgery. For surgical FPDs, the
ABS is working closely with specialty societies to develop the
content and scope of these additional practice areas. These
partnerships reinforce to role of societies in assuring quality
surgical care.
    With continuing education of surgeons outside of certifica-
tion, society resources and meetings play a key role in allow-
ing access to the most current research in a given field and
allow access to the information as well as robust discussion
among members and attendees at the given conference.
There are also refresher courses and/or mini courses on spe-
cific procedures that are offered as part of or in parallel to a
given meeting. One such example is the SAGES Master’s
Program, which is a set of educational programs that may be
completed in person at the meeting or online to expand the
knowledge and skills of a practicing surgeon. There are 12
domains offered by SAGES, which include acute care, biliary,
bariatric, biliary, colorectal, flexible endoscopy, foregut, her-
nia, leadership and professional development, liver, pancreas,
    Chapter 11.   The Role of Surgical Societies in Quality   199

robotic surgery, and solid organ [7, 8]. The SAGES Master’s
Program is designed to provide a knowledge repository in
these specific domains to help deal with the unpredictability
that may be experienced in surgical training. This may also be
a way to learn about a new approach to a familiar surgical
disease or a way to re-familiarize with a procedure and per-
haps learn the most recent innovations.
   One way being investigated to further ensure surgical
skills are verified by an external source that is being devel-
oped by SAGES and other surgical societies: video-based
assessment (VBA). The essence of this process is to be able
to review the operative abilities of a surgeon. VBA reviews
have been shown to correlate with complications in a study
performed with the Michigan Bariatric Surgery Collaborative
[9]. By giving an impartial review of the skills of a surgeon,
this can be used to asses competency of surgeons as a form of
initial certification as well as allowing for a continuing certi-
fication aspect to ensure that a given surgeon is able to per-
form particular tasks with a certain predetermined proficiency.
The VBAs in the Michigan Bariatric Surgery Collaborative
also allowed for feedback to surgeons involved that were de-­
identified and gave each provider ways in which they would
be able to further hone their surgical skills. Given that the
surgical skills did associate with the outcomes of a given sur-
geon, such an assessment and concomitant feedback can
serve as a powerful tool to help improve quality and safety of
operations provided. Robust VBAs are being developed for
each of the eight SAGES Master’s Programs and will eventu-
ally be incorporated into the Master’s Program itself as well
as eventually becoming part of the educational offerings for
residents like the Fundamentals (FLS, FES, FUSE) courses
and certificates [10, 11]. VBA is likely also to become a part
of the board certification process [12].
   Societies may also engage in directed education programs
to improve outcomes by producing educational materials for
their members to augment the quality of care delivered by
practicing surgeons. An example of a program run by SAGES
is the Safe Cholecystectomy Program, which focuses on
200   B. J. Flink and A. D. Pryor

raising awareness and education surrounding avoidance of
common bile duct injuries and other complications of laparo-
scopic cholecystectomy [13]. In focusing on the critical view
of safety, discussing the steps needed to obtain it, as well as
potential pitfalls and when additional help should be sought,
the Safe Cholecystectomy Program directly attempts to
tackle a significant comorbidity of a very common procedure
performed in the general surgery arena.
   Along with the flow of information from a society to its
members, societies can create the data infrastructure needed
to do research and quality improvement efforts at the society
as well as individual investigator level. The most prominent
example of data collection inside of a surgical society is the
American College of Surgeons (ACS) National Surgical
Quality Improvement Program (NSQIP) [14]. There have
been thousands of publications that have been made possible
through NSQIP data. NSQIP also allows for local use of more
extensive data collected by NSQIP data abstractors that are
not in the publicly available datasets to help individual hospi-
tals and providers understand and improve their outcomes. In
fact, the NSQIP database allows for the development of qual-
ity metrics to compare performance across geographic and
demographic differences seen among hospitals. Instead of
being only judged on meeting a specific metric, this helps to
allow for comparison amongst hospitals for them to be able
to know what areas could use improvement and ways in
which they are already doing well.
   There are many additional related databases such as the
National Cancer Database and the Metabolic and Bariatric
Surgery Accreditation and Quality Improvement Project
(MBSAQIP) inside the ACS, the Society of Thoracic Surgeons’
National Database, and the Society for Vascular Surgery’s
Vascular Quality Initiative. Each of these databases, amongst
others, has led to the formation of quality metrics and a large
body of health services research. These databases require
considerable resources, expertise, and coordination that are
made possible through partnership with the sponsoring soci-
eties. This very important source of quality improvement,
    Chapter 11.   The Role of Surgical Societies in Quality   201

risk-adjustment, and overall benchmarking would not be pos-
sible without these partnerships. Although the nucleus of this
change is housed inside of the surgical society’s given data-
base, the information allows for individuals, hospitals, and
healthcare organizations to take the lead in pushing and test-
ing for change in the world of surgery. The ability to help
individuals and organizations is further augmented through
funding that a surgical society can provide to make specific
investigations possible.
    Even outside of the surgical community, a surgical society
can be instrumental with improving surgical care by doing
broader outreach to the community. A prime example of this
is the Stop the Bleed program sponsored by the ACS. Stop
the Bleed training has been shown to be effective in both
retention of life-saving skills and knowledge among non-
medical personnel around the world [15–17]. Specific societ-
ies also gain the power to be able to lobby on behalf of
surgeons as a whole, helping to ensure that adequate financial
reimbursement to allow for standard treatments to continue
is given, as well as to help secure funding for programs that
can provide grant funding or education. The collation of
voices among the ACS Professional Association Political
Action Committee allows for advocacy for surgeons as a
whole on the national level. Without overall awareness and
momentum outside of a relatively small population of sur-
geons, it would be difficult to ensure that individual voices
would not simply be ignored.
    In summary, the resources and knowledge collected by
way of the members of a surgical society allow for the gather-
ing of knowledge and resources that would not be available
to an individual provider, hospital, or health system. It creates
the opportunity to educate members, provide resources for
members to improve their own practice, research the status
quo, find ways to improve surgical practice as a whole, and
define metrics that guide surgical practice. Furthermore, the
gathering of surgeons’ voices allows for discussion and advo-
cacy for practices that can help to improve the interaction of
surgeons within their communities and assist them in
202    B. J. Flink and A. D. Pryor

reaching their goal of helping their patients. Through the col-
lective work and expertise of a board membership, each sur-
gical society can play a pivotal role in quality improvement.


References
 1. SAGES. About the Society of American Gastrointestinal and
    Endoscopic Surgeons. 2021 [cited 2021]. Available from: https://
    www.sages.org/about/.
 2. Woolf SH, et al. Clinical guidelines: potential benefits, limitations,
    and harms of clinical guidelines. BMJ. 1999;318(7182):527–30.
 3. Grimshaw JM, et al. Effectiveness and efficiency of guideline
    dissemination and implementation strategies. Health Technol
    Assess. 2004;8(6):iii–iv, 1–72.
 4. Dirks RC, Walsh D, Haggerty S, Kohn GP, Pryor A, Stefanidis
    D. SAGES guidelines: an appraisal of their quality and value by
    SAGES members. Surg Endosc. 2021;35(4):1493–9.
 5. Rogers AT, et al. Society of American Gastrointestinal and
    Endoscopic Surgeons (SAGES) guidelines development: stan-
    dard operating procedure. Surg Endosc. 2021;35(6):2417–27.
 6. Specialties, A.B.o.M. Focused practice designation. 2021 [cited
    2021]. Available from: https://www.abms.org/board-­certification/
    board-­certification-­requirements/focused-­practice-­designation/.
 7. Jones DB, et al. SAGES University MASTERS program: a struc-
    tured curriculum for deliberate, lifelong learning. Surg Endosc.
    2017;31(8):3061–71.
 8. SAGES. Masters program. 2021 [cited 2021]. Available from:
    https://www.sages.org/masters-­program/.
 9. Birkmeyer JD, et al. Surgical skill and complication rates after
    bariatric surgery. N Engl J Med. 2013;369(15):1434–42.
10. Feldman LS, et al. SAGES Video-Based Assessment (VBA) pro-
    gram: a vision for life-long learning for surgeons. Surg Endosc.
    2020;34(8):3285–8.
11. Ritter EM, et al. Video-based assessment for laparoscopic fun-
    doplication: initial development of a robust tool for operative
    performance assessment. Surg Endosc. 2020;34(7):3176–83.
12. https://www.absurgery.org/default.jsp?news_vba04.21. Accessed
    15 Apr 2021.
     Chapter 11.   The Role of Surgical Societies in Quality     203

13. SAGES. The SAGES safe cholecystectomy program.
    2021 [cited 2021]. Available from: https://www.sages.org/
    safe-­cholecystectomy-­program/.
14. Surgeons, A.C.o. ACS national surgical quality improvement
    project. 2021 [cited 2021]. Available from: https://www.facs.org/
    Quality-­Programs/ACS-­NSQIP.
15. Pasley AM, et al. Stop the bleed: does the training work one
    month out? Am Surg. 2018;84(10):1635–8.
16. Valsecchi D, et al. The rise of the stop the bleed campaign in
    Italy. J Spec Oper Med. 2019;19(4):95–9.
17. Villegas CV, et al. Stop the bleed: effective training in need of
    improvement. J Surg Res. 2020;255:627–31.
           Part II
Surgical Outcomes
Chapter 12
Perioperative Risk
Assessment
Gina Adrales and Swathi Reddy




Introduction
A careful multidisciplinary approach to preoperative prepa-
ration is essential to ensure optimal patient outcomes.
Determination of perioperative risk informs shared decision-­
making regarding the selection and timing of the surgical
procedure and postoperative management. In this chapter,
we will explore standards of care for preoperative testing and
consultation and discuss methods of assessment of periopera-
tive risk.


Delivery of High-Value Preoperative Care
Within the confines of a complex healthcare system, health-
care providers must seek equipoise between testing to iden-
tify risk and reduction of unnecessary studies to minimize
cost and potential harm. An estimated $18 billion is spent
annually in the USA on preoperative testing [1]. While some

G. Adrales (*) · S. Reddy
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, USA
e-mail: gadrale1@jhmi.edu

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature   207
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_12
208   G. Adrales and S. Reddy

of this expenditure undoubtedly prevents perioperative com-
plications, a portion is wasted on studies that have no impact
on surgical management or outcomes. The rate of unneces-
sary preoperative testing is reported to be 32–45% in various
studies [2, 3]. There is a growing recognition that the enormity
of healthcare costs in the USA is unsustainable. This has
fueled a shift to eliminate low-value care, including a decrease
in preoperative medical evaluation and testing.
   Choosing Wisely is an initiative of the ABIM Foundation
whose mission is to stimulate patient-clinician communica-
tion about healthcare that is evidence-based, necessary, and
free from harm. This health education campaign is supported
by numerous medical and surgical societies, including SAGES,
to prevent overuse of treatment and eliminate nonessential
or duplicative care. Included in this effort are recommenda-
tions to eliminate routine preoperative testing before low-­
risk surgical procedures, carotid artery disease screening
prior to cardiac surgery in the absence of symptoms or
comorbidities, and diagnostic cardiac testing in asymptomatic
patients before low- to moderate-risk surgery. Such testing
may not alter management but could result in delayed care,
avoidable healthcare costs, and harm from additional
testing.
   A potential unforeseen consequence of a reduction of
preoperative assessment is a lack of patient and family pre-
paredness. Preoperative assessment entails more than labora-
tory, radiologic, and cardiac tests. Preoperative evaluation
promotes patient education, collaborative anesthesiology and
surgical intraoperative care, postoperative and home care
plans, and assurance of perioperative tools to deliver indi-
vidualized care such as management of the difficult airway.
While efforts to reduce low-value preoperative testing may
be successful, there may be unintended consequences such as
surgical no-shows or cancellations due to lack of compliance
with preanesthetic eating restrictions or medication cessation
[4]. These factors must be considered, particularly in caring
for socioeconomically disadvantaged or less educated patient
groups.
              Chapter 12. Perioperative Risk Assessment     209

 ho Is at Risk? Methods of Assessment
W
of Perioperative Risk
Evaluation of perioperative risk begins with a history and
physical exam. Basic lab testing may be added to determine
patients at risk for complications through validated scoring
systems.


Preoperative Evaluation and Physical Exam

All surgery patients should first undergo a thorough history
and physical exam. The history is essential in stratifying risk
and uncovering barriers to care. This discussion should
include a detailed history of comorbidities, particularly seri-
ous cardiac and pulmonary conditions and anesthetic compli-
cations. A history of chronic pain or addiction will guide the
intraoperative anesthetic plan and postoperative multimodal
pain management. Prior surgical procedures, both minimally
invasive and open surgeries, as well as implants including
mesh and orthopedic hardware will affect surgical planning,
positioning, and assessment of intraoperative procedural risk.
Relevant surgical operative notes should be obtained. Prior
anesthetic records should be reviewed to determine if there is
a history of difficult airway or prior intraoperative cardiopul-
monary event. A thorough review of the patient’s medication
list is crucial and should include anticoagulants and antiplate-
let agents, immunosuppressive drugs, and glycemic control
agents. Special consideration and advisement should be given
regarding cessation of sodium glucose cotransporter-2 inhibi-
tors starting 3–4 days prior to surgery. Medication review
often overlooks the use of herbal or vitamin supplements,
which can be underreported by patients. Some supplements,
such as omega-3 fish oil and ginger, can increase the risk for
bleeding due to antiplatelet or thrombotic inhibition effects
[5]. Medication modification should be discussed with the
patient prior to scheduling surgery, and plans for anticoagula-
tion bridging and postoperative resumption of medications
210   G. Adrales and S. Reddy

should be formulated in partnership with the primary care
provider.
   The physical exam should begin with an assessment of
overall well-being and collection of vital signs. Uncontrolled
hypertension, tachycardia, or bradycardia should prompt
evaluation by the patient’s primary physician for medical
optimization. The general appearance of a patient can be
informative with regard to screening for frailty, mobility, and
ability to participate in perioperative care. A standard exam
should include auscultation of the heart and lungs as well as
identification of prior surgical incisions, existing hernias, and
skin infection that may affect abdominal surgery and surgical
outcomes. Examination concerns specific to anesthesia would
be an airway and neck assessment, which is used to ascertain
intubation difficulty and risk of cardiopulmonary complica-
tion due to sleep apnea or acid reflux. Brief dental exam or
history of poor dentition may indicate elevated risk at intuba-
tion and risk for infection, particularly after planned pros-
thetic mesh implants.
   For the elective surgical patient, the preoperative evalua-
tion should ideally occur early enough to allow for involve-
ment of a multidisciplinary team including the anesthesiologist,
primary care physician, and other subspecialists such as the
patient’s cardiologist and pulmonologist as needed. A dieti-
cian should be involved preoperatively in the case of mal-
nourished, frail, or obese patients. All candidates should be
initially evaluated by the primary care provider or a periop-
erative medical specialist, who will be involved in p
                                                    ­ reoperative
optimization of comorbidities as well as postoperative man-
agement [6].


 iochemical, Hematologic, and Nutritional
B
Evaluation
Laboratory tests are indicated prior to procedures with
higher risk for perioperative complications and in high-risk
patients, including morbidly obese and diabetic patients.
              Chapter 12. Perioperative Risk Assessment      211

Routine hemoglobin and hematocrit levels are recommended
by the American Society of Anesthesiologists for patients of
advanced age and those preparing for surgery associated with
high risk of blood loss [7]. All geriatric patients should have a
preoperative creatinine [8]. The need for additional studies,
such as liver function panel and coagulation studies, should
be directed by the history and physical findings and concern
for comorbidities, such as cirrhosis.
   We recommend obtaining a hemoglobin A1c in patients
with a preexisting diagnosis of diabetes or prediabetes.
Fasting glucose level is not recommended for asymptomatic
patients [9]. Glycemic control in the diabetic patient is indi-
cated to minimize the risks of infection and wound healing
complications. Preoperative protein deficiency is associated
with an increased risk of complications, including poor
wound healing, and is present in up to 32% of bariatric sur-
gery patients [10]. As such, a nutritional profile including
albumin, iron, folate, ferritin, and a fasting lipid panel should
be obtained [11]. However, for asymptomatic non-geriatric
patients, routine nutrition laboratory testing is not recom-
mended [9].


Surgery-Specific Factors

Surgical urgency is a major determinant of perioperative risk.
Urgent or emergent status elevates the risk of complications
compared to elective procedures [12]. The American College
of Cardiology and American Heart Association define the
following: (1) emergency surgery as threatened life or limb
without intervention within 6 h, (2) urgent surgery as threat-
ened life or limb without intervention within 24 h, (3) time-­
sensitive surgery as necessary within 1–6 weeks, and (4)
elective surgery as a procedure that can be deferred for up to
1 year [13]. A thoughtful assessment of the risk of blood loss,
hemodynamic effect and stress response, fluid requirements,
and length of the surgical procedure is important in deter-
mining the risk of cardiac events. Surgical risk stratification is
212   G. Adrales and S. Reddy

based on urgency and surgical type [14]. Breast and ophthal-
mology procedures are considered low-risk, whereas adrenal-
ectomy and complex bowel surgery are considered high-risk
surgeries that warrant assessment of patient functional
capacity.


Pulmonary Complications

Postoperative pulmonary complications are a significant con-
tributor to postoperative mortality and morbidity. Even a
single mild pulmonary complication is associated with early
mortality, ICU admission, and longer hospitalization among
patients with American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) 3
status [15].
   Procedural and patient factors influence the risk of pulmo-
nary complications. Upper abdominal and thoracic proce-
dures impart a decrease in functional residual capacity which
can lead to atelectasis and pneumonia. The establishment of
pneumoperitoneum is associated with increased peak airway
pressures, hypercarbia, and acidosis. Age is an independent
predictor of pulmonary complications [16]. All patients
should be screened for smoking, as smokers are 1.7 times
more likely than nonsmokers to have pulmonary complica-
tions and are at greater risk for postoperative general mor-
bidity, wound complications, critical care admission, and
neurologic complications [17]. Obstructive lung disease, pul-
monary hypertension, and congestive heart failure increase
the risk of pulmonary complications [18, 19]. The prevalence
of obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) ranges from 35% to 60%
in the morbidly obese. Severe undiagnosed obstructive sleep
apnea is an independent risk factor for surgical complications
[20]. Patients with uncontrolled or suspected obstructive
sleep apnea should undergo sleep medicine evaluation with
sleep study.
              Chapter 12. Perioperative Risk Assessment     213

Cardiac Considerations

The American College of Cardiology and American Heart
Association outlined an algorithm to assess the risk of a
major cardiac adverse event in its 2014 guideline [21]. This
includes a determination of the urgency of the surgery and
clinical evaluation for acute coronary syndrome. A validated
instrument to determine cardiac complication risk, such as
the Revised Cardiac Risk Index (Table 12.1), is then applied.
Alternatively, the surgical risk calculator by the American
College of Surgeons (ACS) National Surgical Quality
Improvement Program (NSQIP) is utilized. Patients at low
risk (<1%) for a major cardiac adverse event do not need
further diagnostic testing. Patients at increased risk with poor
functional capacity (<4 Measurement of Exercise Tolerance
Before Surgery METs) should undergo pharmacologic stress
testing if it is expected that the results would change manage-
ment. Additional cardiac testing is pursued based on the
number of clinical risk factors present. Noninvasive cardiac
testing is indicated for patients with one to two risk factors

Table 12.1 Revised cardiac risk index [21]
Clinical parameter                         RCRI points
History of cerebrovascular disease         1
Diabetes mellitus requiring insulin      1
Serum creatinine >2 mg/dL                1
History of ischemic heart disease        1
High-risk surgery                        1
Points                                   Risk
0                                        0.4%
1                                        0.9%
2                                        6.6%
214   G. Adrales and S. Reddy

who are undergoing intermediate risk procedures (1–5% risk
of cardiac event) such as intraabdominal surgery [14]. Patients
with functional capacity greater than 4 METs do not need
additional testing.
   The Canadian Cardiovascular Society Guidelines on peri-
operative cardiac risk assessment include the following
strong recommendations [22]:

1. Measurement of brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) or
   N-­terminal fragment of proBNP (NT-proBNP) in patients
   who are 65 years of age or older, are 45–64 years of age
   with significant cardiovascular disease, or have a Revised
   Cardiac Risk Index score ≥1
2. No preoperative resting echocardiography, coronary com-
   puted tomography angiography, exercise or cardiopulmo-
   nary exercise testing, or pharmacological stress
   echocardiography or radionuclide imaging to enhance
   perioperative cardiac risk estimation
3. No initiation or continuation of acetylsalicylic acid for the
   prevention of perioperative cardiac events, except in
   patients with a recent coronary artery stent or who will
   undergo carotid endarterectomy
4. Avoidance of α2 agonist or β-blocker initiation within 24 h
   before surgery
5. Withholding of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor
   and angiotensin II receptor blocker starting 24 h before
   surgery
6. Smoking cessation before surgery
7. Daily measurement of troponin for 48–72 h after surgery in
   patients with an elevated NT-proBNP/BNP before surgery
   or if there is no NT-proBNP/BNP measurement before
   surgery, in those who have a Revised Cardiac Risk Index
   score ≥1, and in those aged 45–64 years with significant
   cardiovascular disease or aged 65 years or older
8. Initiation of long-term acetylsalicylic acid and statin ther-
   apy in patients who suffer myocardial injury/infarction
   after surgery
              Chapter 12. Perioperative Risk Assessment      215

   The management and timing of surgery in patients with
cardiac stents is a frequently encountered issue. Elective sur-
gery is contraindicated in patients with recent coronary stent
placements within 6 months of placement due to the elevated
risk of stent thrombosis. Timing of elective noncardiac sur-
gery is partially dependent on the type of stent placed (bare
metal versus drug-eluting stent) and whether cessation of
antiplatelet agents is needed.


Special Considerations in Obese Patients

Obesity is an independent risk factor for cardiovascular dis-
ease, and as such, a routine electrocardiogram (ECG) and
chest radiograph are recommended as well as a preoperative
consultation with the anesthesiologist [6]. Obesity is a known
risk factor for coronary artery disease, heart failure, cardio-
myopathy, and arrhythmias. In fact, the mortality risk from
heart disease is two to three times greater in a patient with a
BMI greater than 35 kg/m2 compared with a person of normal
or lean BMI [23]. BMI >35 kg/m2 is an independent risk fac-
tor for postoperative pneumonia, respiratory failure, and
surgical site infection [24]. Although intraabdominal surgery
is considered an intermediate risk procedure by the American
Heart Association, all patients should initially be evaluated
by ECG and a chest radiograph. This should be followed by
stress testing in indicated patients. Traditional exercise stress
testing may not be feasible in obese patients, and nuclear
perfusion studies are similarly limited by body habitus. In
most cases, pharmacologic stress echocardiography will be
the effective alternative of choice [25].


Chronic Liver Disease

Cirrhosis is associated with an increased risk of perioperative
morbidity and mortality [9]. MELD scores should be calcu-
lated for all cirrhotic patients to assess perioperative risk.
216   G. Adrales and S. Reddy

Patients with MELD score >10 are at higher risk for periop-
erative morbidity [26]. The risk of complications continues to
rise with rising MELD scores. The postoperative mortality
rate for patients with MELD scores of 15 or greater is sub-
stantial at over 50% [26].


Frailty

Frailty refers to a vulnerable subset of patients with dimin-
ished physical function and limited physiologic reserve. There
are two aspects of frailty, including phenotypic frailty and
deficit accumulation [27]. Phenotypic frailty refers to biologic
decline manifested by weight loss, fatigue, and weakness.
Index frailty or deficit accumulation is determined by an
assessment of comorbidities, weakness, and walking speed.
Frailty assessment tools are designed to identify patients at
risk for postoperative morbidity and mortality, longer hospi-
talization, and discharge to higher level of care. Preoperative
frailty assessment is recommended for older patients to allow
for more robust discussion with patients and their families
about perioperative risk and postoperative care needs.


Risk Assessment Tools
Over the last decade, multiple perioperative risk assessment
tools have been proposed for surgery patients to assist in risk
stratification. The American Society of Anesthesiologists
(ASA) Status (see Table 12.2) guides planning for intraopera-
tive and postoperative monitoring and is commonly used to
stratify patients in outcomes research. The Revised Cardiac
Risk Index and Caprini Risk Assessment Model for venous
thromboembolism are utilized frequently to assess cardiovas-
cular complication risk and to guide testing and prophylaxis
measures.
   In 2013, the ACS published a surgical risk calculator
derived from the NSQIP data, the most robust surgical
             Chapter 12. Perioperative Risk Assessment             217

Table 12.2 American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA)
classification
ASA I       Normal, healthy
ASA II   Mild systemic disease
ASA      Severe systemic disease
III
ASA      Severe systemic disease that is constant threat to life
IV
ASA V    Moribund patient not expected to survive without the
         operation
ASA      Brain-dead patient whose organs are being removed for
VI       donor purposes


outcomes program to date. This calculator estimates the risk
of multiple complications within the 30-day postoperative
period using 21 predictive variables (https://riskcalculator.
facs.org) [28]. This risk calculator has been validated in mul-
tiple populations including geriatric patients, various cancer
populations, and procedure-specific studies. Limitations of
the ACS NSQIP Risk Calculator include that the model is
derived from a limited set of 393 participating hospitals,
which perform only about 30% of all surgeries in the
USA. As such, it may not account for the variation in out-
comes seen across all US hospitals. The accuracy of the tool is
further dependent on coding and reporting accuracy at the
individual institution level [29].


 urrent Standards of Care: Which
C
Asymptomatic Patients Should Undergo
Preoperative Testing and Consultation?
Pulmonary Assessment

In general, routine chest X-rays are not required for asymp-
tomatic patients. Chest radiograph is recommended for
218   G. Adrales and S. Reddy

patients with known cardiovascular and pulmonary disease;
patients more than 50 years old who will have upper abdomi-
nal, thoracic, or abdominal aortic surgery; and patients with
Class 3 obesity (BMI ≥ 40 kg/m2) [16, 30]. Routine pulmonary
function testing is not recommended.
   Pulmonary and preoperative anesthesiology evaluation
can be considered for patients with severe obesity, history of
difficult intubation, elevated Mallampati score, and positive
sleep apnea screening questionnaires. The STOP-Bang
Questionnaire (see Table 12.3) and Berlin Questionnaire are
commonly used [31, 32]. The Berlin Questionnaire calculates
risk for sleep apnea based on snoring frequency and intensity,
observed apnea during sleep, fatigue after sleep and during
waking time, history of falling asleep while driving, and
hypertension [32].


Cardiovascular Assessment

Electrocardiogram is recommended for patients with known
cardiovascular disease or for patients to undergo higher-risk

Table 12.3 STOP-Bang Questionnaire for obstructive sleep apnea [31]
                                                         No Yes
Snore loudly?                                                  1
Daytime fatigue?                                               1
Has anyone observed you stop breathing?                        1
High blood pressure?                                           1
BMI ≥ 35 kg/m2                                                 1
Age > 50                                                       1
Neck circumference (>43 cm in males, 41 cm in                  1
females)
Male sex                                                       1
Low risk 0–2, intermediate 3–4, high risk 5–8 (or >2 and male or
BMI > 35 kg/m2)
              Chapter 12. Perioperative Risk Assessment         219

surgical procedures, regardless of symptoms. Routine ECG or
echocardiogram is not indicated for asymptomatic patients
preparing for low-risk surgeries. Stress testing is reserved for
higher-risk patients with poor functional capacity (<4 METs).


Conclusion
Identification of patients at risk for perioperative cardiopul-
monary complications through careful history and examina-
tion and validated risk indices is imperative in the delivery of
high-value care. Adherence to standards for selective preop-
erative testing and consultations reduces cost without the
expense of increased mortality or morbidity. For certain
patient populations, preoperative evaluation by primary care
or anesthesiology providers remains a vital means to deliver
patient education, manage expectations, and optimize modifi-
able perioperative risk factors. This may be particularly
important in safety-net hospitals and for frail and socioeco-
nomically disadvantaged patients.


References
 1. Benarroch-Gampel J, Sheffield KM, Duncan CB, et al.
    Preoperative laboratory testing in patients undergoing elective,
    low-risk ambulatory surgery. Ann Surg. 2012;256:518–28.
 2. Beloeil H, Richard D, Drewniak N, Molliex S. Overuse of preop-
    erative laboratory coagulation testing and ABO blood typing: a
    French national study. Br J Anesth. 2017;119(6):1186–93.
 3. Matulis J, Lui S, Mecchella J, North F, Holmes A. Choosing
    wisely: a quality improvement initiative to decrease unnecessary
    preoperative testing. BMJ Qual Improv Rep. 2017;6(1):1–5.
 4. Mafi JN, Godoy-Travieso P, Wei E, Anders M, Amaya R, Carrillo
    CA, Berry JL, Sarff L, Daskivich L, Vanala S, Ladapo J, Keeler
    E, Damberg CL, Sarkisian C. Evaluation of an intervention to
    reduce low-value preoperative care for patients undergoing cata-
    ract surgery at a safety-net health system. JAMA Intern Med.
    2019;179(5):648–57.
220    G. Adrales and S. Reddy

 5. Levy I, Attias S, Ben-Arye E, Goldstein L, Matter I, Somri M,
    Schiff E. Perioperative risks of dietary and herbal supplements.
    World J Surg. 2017;41(4):927–34.
 6. Eldar S, Heneghan HM, Brethauer S, Schauer PR. A focus on
    surgical preoperative evaluation of the bariatric patient--the
    Cleveland Clinic protocol and review of the literature. Surgeon.
    2011;9(5):273–7.
 7. Apfelbaum JL, Connis RT, Nickinovich DG, et al. Practice
    advisory for preanesthesia evaluation: an updated report by
    the American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on
    Preanesthesia Evaluation. Anesthesiology. 2012;116(3):522–38.
 8. Chow WB, Rosenthal RA, Merkow RP, et al. Optimal preopera-
    tive assessment of the geriatric surgical patient: a best practices
    guideline from the American College of Surgeons National
    Surgical Quality Improvement Program and the American
    Geriatrics Society. J Am Coll Surg. 2012;215(4):453–66.
 9. Bierle DM, Raslau D, Regan DW, Sundsted KK, Mauck
    KF. Preoperative evaluation before non cardiac surgery. Mayo
    Clin Proc. 2020;95(4):807–22.
10. Major P, Malczak P, Wysocki M, Torbicz G, Gajewska N,
    Pedziwiatr M, et al. Bariatric patients’ nutritional status as a risk
    factor for postoperative complications, prolonged length of hos-
    pital stay and hospital readmission: a retrospective cohort study.
    Int J Surg. 2018;56:210–4.
11. Parrott J, Frank L, Rabena R, Craggs-Dino L, Isom KA,
    Greiman L. American Society for Metabolic and Bariatric
    Surgery integrated health nutritional guidelines for the surgical
    weight loss patient 2016 update: micronutrients. Surg Obes Relat
    Dis. 2017;13(5):727–41.
12. Bilimoria KY, Liu Y, Paruch JL, et al. Development and evalua-
    tion of the universal ACS NSQIP surgical risk calculator: a deci-
    sion aid and informed consent tool for patients and surgeons. J
    Am Coll Surg. 2013;217(5):833–42.e1–e3.
13. Fleisher LA, Fleischmann KE, Auerbach AD, et al. 2014 ACC/
    AHA guideline on perioperative cardiovascular evaluation and
    management of patients undergoing noncardiac surgery: execu-
    tive summary: a report of the American College of Cardiology/
    American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines.
    Circulation. 2014;130(24):2215–45.
14. Raslau D, Bierle DM, Stephenson CR, Mikhail MA, Kebede
    EB, Mauck KF. Preoperative cardiac risk assessment. Mayo Clin
    Proc. 2020;95(5):1064–79.
               Chapter 12. Perioperative Risk Assessment          221

15. Fernandez-Bustamante A, Frendl G, Sprung J, Kor DJ,
    Subramaniam B, Martinez Ruiz R, Lee JW, Henderson WG,
    Moss A, Mehdiratta N, Colwell MM, Bartels K, Kolodzie K,
    Giquel J, Vidal Melo MF. Postoperative pulmonary complica-
    tions, early mortality, and hospital stay following noncardiotho-
    racic surgery: a multicenter study by the perioperative research
    network investigators. JAMA Surg. 2017;152(2):157.
16. Smetana GW, Lawrence VA, Cornell JE, American College
    of Physicians. Preoperative pulmonary risk stratification for
    noncardiothoracic surgery: systematic review for the American
    College of Physicians. Ann Intern Med. 2006;144(8):581.
17. Grønkjær M, Eliasen M, Skov-Ettrup LS, Tolstrup JS, Christiansen
    AH, Mikkelsen SS, Becker U, Flensborg-Madsen T. Preoperative
    smoking status and postoperative complications: a systematic
    review and meta-analysis. Ann Surg. 2014;259(1):52–71.
18. Gupta H, Ramanan B, Gupta PK, Fang X, Polich A,
    Modrykamien A, Schuller D, Morrow LE. Impact of COPD on
    postoperative outcomes: results from a national database. Chest.
    2013;143(6):1599–606.
19. Meyer S, McLaughlin VV, Seyfarth HJ, Bull TM, Vizza CD,
    Gomberg-Maitland M, Preston IR, Barberà JA, Hassoun PM,
    Halank M, Jaïs X, Nickel N, Hoeper MM, Humbert M. Outcomes
    of noncardiac, nonobstetric surgery in patients with PAH: an
    international prospective survey. Eur Respir J. 2013;41(6):1302–7.
20. Abdelsattar ZM, Hendren S, Wong SL, Campbell DA Jr,
    Ramachandran SK. The impact of untreated obstructive sleep
    apnea on cardiopulmonary complications in general and vascu-
    lar surgery: a cohort study. Sleep. 2015;38(8):1205.
21. Lee TH, Marcantonio ER, Mangione CM, Thomas EJ, Polanczyk
    CA, Cook EF, et al. Derivation and prospective validation of a
    simple index for prediction of cardiac risk of major noncardiac
    surgery. Circulation. 1999;100(10):1043–9.
22. Duceppe E, Parlow J, MacDonald P, Lyons K, McMullen M,
    Srinatan S, Graham M, Tandon V, Styles K, Bessissow A, Sessler
    DI, Bryson G, Devereaux PJ. Canadian cardiovascular society
    guidelines on perioperative cardiac risk assessment and manage-
    ment for patients who undergo noncardiac. Surg Can J Cardiol.
    2017;33(1):17–32.
23. Zalesin KC, Franklin BA, Miller WM, Peterson ED, McCullough
    PA. Impact of obesity on cardiovascular disease. Med Clin North
    Am. 2011;95(5):919–37.
222    G. Adrales and S. Reddy

24. Valentijn TM, Galal W, Hoeks SE, van Gestel YR, Verhagen HJ,
    Stolker RJ. Impact of obesity on postoperative and long-term
    outcomes in a general surgery population: a retrospective cohort
    study. World J Surg. 2013;37(11):2561–8.
25. Supariwala A, Makani H, Kahan J, Pierce M, Bajwa F, Dukkipati
    SS, Teixeira J, Chaudhry FA. Feasibility and prognostic value
    of stress echocardiography in obese, morbidly obese, and super
    obese patients referred for bariatric surgery. Echocardiography.
    2014;31(7):879–85.
26. Hanje AJ, Patel T. Preoperative evaluation of patients with liver
    disease. Nat Clin Pract Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2007;4(5):266–76.
27. Darrell JN, Gregorevic KJ, Story DA, Hubbard RE, Lim
    WK. Frailty indexes in perioperative and critical care: a system-
    atic review. Arch Gerontol Geriatr. 2018;79:88–96.
28. Bilimoria KY, Liu Y, Paruch JL, Zhou L, Kmiecik TE, Ko CY,
    et al. Development and evaluation of the universal ACS NSQIP
    surgical risk calculator: a decision aid and informed consent tool
    for patients and surgeons. J Am Coll Surg. 2013;217(5):833–42.
    e1–3.
29. Keller DS, Ho JW, Mercadel AJ, Ogola GO, Steele SR. Are we
    taking a risk with risk assessment tools? Evaluating the relation-
    ship between NSQIP and the ACS risk calculator in colorectal
    surgery. Am J Surg. 2018;216(4):645–51.
30. Poirier P, Alpert MA, Fleisher L, et al. Cardiovascular evaluation
    and management of severely obese patients undergoing sur-
    gery: a science advisory from the American Heart Association.
    Circulation. 2009;120(1):86–95.
31. Chung F, Abdullah HR, Liao P. STOP-bang questionnaire: a
    practical approach to screen for obstructive sleep apnea. Chest.
    2016;149:631.
32. Netzer NC, Stoohs RA, Netzer CM, Clark K, Strohl KP. Using
    the Berlin Questionnaire to identify patients at risk for the sleep
    apnea syndrome. Ann Intern Med. 1999;131(7):485–91.
Chapter 13
The Current State
of Surgical Outcome
Measurement
Brian J. Nasca, Jonah J. Stulberg, Marylise Boutros,
and Jeongyoon Moon



 he Objectives for This Chapter Are
T
as Follows
1. Review the current tools utilized to measure surgical
   outcomes.
2. How should surgeons interpret current surgical outcome
   measures?



B. J. Nasca
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Chicago, IL, USA
e-mail: brian.nasca@northwestern.edu
J. J. Stulberg
The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston,
Houston, TX, USA
M. Boutros (*) · J. Moon
Division of Colon and Rectal Surgery, Sir Mortimer B. Davis Jewish
General Hospital, Montreal, QC, Canada
e-mail: marylise.boutros@mcgill.ca;
jeongyoon.moon@mail.mcgill.ca

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature   223
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_13
224   B. J. Nasca et al.

Introduction
Health services research has rapidly expanded in the past
decade, particularly in surgery, with increasing focus on pro-
viding high-quality, cost-effective care aimed to improve
patients’ satisfaction and quality of life (QoL). Health ser-
vices research in the field of surgery is referred to as surgical
outcomes research. The following definition provides a clear
description of the nature and purpose of health services
research: “Health services research examines how people get
access to health care, how much care costs, and what happens
to patients as a result of this care. The main goals of health
services research are to identify the most effective ways to
organize, manage, finance, and deliver high quality care,
reduce medical errors, and improve patient safety” [1].
   Codman’s unrelenting focus on the “end results” of a surgi-
cal episode was a call to surgical accountability that has
grown into a vast field of surgical outcome measurement [2].
We now have a diverse set of methods and mechanisms for
collecting and analyzing surgical outcomes and surgical qual-
ity of care. The collective effort to improve drives us to
achieve better outcomes for patients, and it is critical that we
understand the potential as well as the potential pitfalls of the
available data sources. In today’s world of “big data,” patient
outcomes are more accessible to researchers, and when used
correctly several new options now exist to study patient out-
comes across large databases to determine what factors or
techniques produce better outcomes. The ever-enlarging
body of literature has great potential, and we will explore the
benefits and downfalls of large databases, how those data-
bases are created, how to interpret the findings when they are
used, and what to expect in the future from outcomes
research. The ultimate goal is to improve overall knowledge
to achieve better patient care.
   Chapter 13. The Current State of Surgical Outcome…        225

 easuring Surgical Outcomes
M
for Improvement
Federal initiatives driven by the Patient Protection and
Affordable Care Act of 2010 require hospitals to demon-
strate that they provide high-quality care in order to receive
proper compensation, reflecting a shift from quantity- to
quality-driven care. In 2012, the Center for Medicare and
Medicaid Services (CMMS) launched the Hospital
Readmission Reduction Program that incurs reimbursement
penalties to hospitals for having higher than expected read-
mission rates, specifically focusing on Medicare beneficiaries
who are over 65 years of age with specific medical conditions
and those who underwent coronary artery bypass graft sur-
gery, elective primary total hip arthroplasty, or total knee
arthroplasty [3]. Such policy changes at the national level
have spurred growing interest in strategies that optimize
quality of care, with a special focus on decreasing readmis-
sions and complications among surgical patients.
    The ultimate goal of surgical outcomes research is to iden-
tify areas in need of improvement and implement specific
changes that lead to better quality of care for patients. In
order to successfully plan and adopt such change, it is essen-
tial to be able to critically evaluate the current care that is
being provided, as “we cannot improve what we cannot mea-
sure.” Donabedian provided a framework for health services
research in a landmark paper in 1966, which defined three
different elements used to measure quality of care: structure,
process, and outcomes [4].
    First, structure refers to the setting and workforce that
compose the healthcare delivery system. Examples relevant
to surgical care include fellowship training of surgeons, nurse-­
to-­patient ratio, and case volume. Information on structural
components is easily accessible and measurable. However, it
is not an accurate proxy for quality and is often fixed and
therefore difficult for healthcare providers to act upon.
226   B. J. Nasca et al.

    Second, process refers to how care is delivered and, more
specifically, care pathways that apply to a large number of
patients. Examples include postoperative enhanced recovery
protocols and adherence to cancer screening guidelines.
Many process measures in surgery are reported and moni-
tored at the national level by the Surgical Care Improvement
Project, which was created to reduce important perioperative
morbidities, such as surgical site infection, adverse cardiac
events, and venous thromboembolism, by setting national
standards of best practices in surgery. Process measures
reflect the care that patients actually receive and therefore
are great targets for quality improvement initiatives.
Measuring and reporting of process measures has been asso-
ciated with significant decrease in perioperative complica-
tions among surgical patients [5, 6]. A major limitation is that
many of the known processes relate to surgical outcomes that
are rare or may not carry significant importance from the
patient’s perspective.
    Third, outcome measures reflect the totality of care pro-
vided by the healthcare system on the patient. Given that
outcome measures focus on the experience of the patient and
represents the bottom line of patient care, it is ultimately the
most important measure to improve. Traditionally, outcome
measures that were the main focus of surgical research were
objective measures such as perioperative mortality, morbid-
ity, length of stay, readmission and complication rates, and
cost of hospitalization. More recently, there has been a grow-
ing interest in subjective outcome measures such as patient
satisfaction, as well as patient-reported QoL and functional
status.
    A major challenge in interpreting and utilizing outcome
measures lies in identifying which component(s) of care is
(are) most responsible for a poor outcome and how it can be
targeted for change. Often, causes of poor outcomes are com-
plex and multifactorial and therefore require multidisci-
plinary action. Another important challenge is that many
surgical outcomes are rare, including adverse events such as
postoperative mortality and major morbidity. At a single
   Chapter 13. The Current State of Surgical Outcome…     227

institution level, insufficient event rates or number of total
cases can preclude reliable representation of outcomes or
robust analyses to identify possible predictors of this poor
outcome [7, 8]. Large scale data collection involving multiple
institutions to aggregate and compare outcomes could over-
come this important limitation. However, to perform ade-
quate risk adjustments between different care providers, it is
important to collect detailed clinical data, which requires
significant resources [9]. The American College of Surgeons
(ACS)-National Surgical Quality Improvement Project
(NSQIP), which is the largest ongoing, national-level initia-
tive aimed at measuring and reporting surgical outcomes,
collects more than 80 patient variables for this purpose [10].


Large Nationwide Standardized Databases
Since its founding in 1913, the American College of Surgeons
(ACS) has strived to improve surgical quality of care. They
formed the Hospital Standardization Program which is now
known as the Joint Commission [11]. This program developed
a “minimum standard” for accreditation of hospitals.
Eventually they improved standards to be an “optimal
achievable” level of care [11]. Along the journey of the ACS,
they formed the Commission on Cancer (CoC) in 1922 and
the Committee on Trauma in 1950 (Quality Programs). The
basis of the Veteran’s Affairs Surgical Quality Improvement
Program (VASQIP) came into being as part of a 1986 man-
date by Congress [12]. The Veterans Health Administration
completed the National VA Surgical Risk Study from 1991 to
1993 with the aim of developing and validating risk adjust-
ment models for surgical outcomes. With the success and vali-
dation of those methods, the Veterans Affairs National
Surgical Quality Improvement Program (VASQIP) was
founded in 1994 [13].
   VASQIP examines 30-day postoperative mortality and
morbidity of VA patients collected by examining CPT codes
and entered by trained staff. VASQIP does collect unique
228   B. J. Nasca et al.

hospital identifying information that can be used by VA
Research and Quality Improvement staff. Key variables
examined are mortality, reoperation within 30 days, readmis-
sion, and length of stay. Patient outcomes are collected using
a systematic sampling of the cases performed at each institu-
tion to represent hospital quality. One limitation in the gen-
eralizability of VASQIP data is that while the VA Health
System serves over 19 million veterans at nearly 2000 facili-
ties, only 10% of veterans are female [12]. This leads to an
unbalanced demographic which may limit the generalizability
of findings outside of the VA [14].
   More recently, the ACS brought the Veteran’s Affairs (VA)
Surgical Quality Improvement Program (VASQIP) to the
private side of healthcare forming the National Surgical
Quality Improvement Program (NSQIP) [13]. The ACS has
also started credentialing programs for specific disease man-
agement like the National Accreditation Program for Breast
Cancers (NAPBC) and the Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery
Accreditation and Quality Improvement Program
(MBSAQIP).
   The ACS-NSQIP database began as an effort initiated by
the VA health system researchers and clinicians in the late
1980s in response to reports of high complication rates in VA
hospitals [15]. Following demonstration of feasibility and
potential benefit of collecting and reporting surgical out-
comes and associated clinical variables through pilot trials in
the VAs and interested non-VA hospitals, the ACS took the
lead to expand the initiative to a broader group of hospitals
in the USA in 2004 [16, 17]. As of the time of publication of
this chapter, there are approximately 700 hospitals participat-
ing in and contributing to the ACS-NSQIP database. The
ACS-NSQIP is a nationally validated, risk-adjusted, outcome-­
based clinical registry designed to measure and improve the
quality of surgical care. It uses a prospective, peer-controlled,
validated database to quantify 30-day, risk-adjusted surgical
outcomes, which provide a valid comparison of outcomes
among all hospitals in the program [18]. ACS-NSQIP features
   Chapter 13. The Current State of Surgical Outcome…     229

regular feedback to participating sites, where a semiannual
report of the hospital’s actual versus risk-adjusted expected
mortality and various morbidities is presented by procedure
type. Site performance is graded as being worse than expected
or better than expected, taking into account various con-
founding factors, such as hospital structure and surgical case
complexity, through risk adjustment modeling [19]. ACS-­
NSQIP uses trained personnel to collect clinical data, but not
administrative billing data. These individuals receive exten-
sive training on the data collection process, have clinical
backgrounds (typically nursing), and are regularly audited to
assure a very high level of consistency to data reporting. Data
are available for analysis by researchers, but hospital identi-
fiers are removed to allow for anonymity across hospitals.
ACS-NSQIP developed a risk calculator in 2013 in order to
help assess and support surgeon and patient decisions on
operations based on empirical data derived from their
database.
   Another important set of clinical registries are those that
focus on cancer outcomes, which take a more longitudinal
and comprehensive approach to their data collection meth-
odology. The ACS CoC is a consortium of over 1500 pro-
grams with the goal of improving survival and quality of life
for cancer patients. They release guidelines and standards to
ensure quality care and conduct surveys to assess compliance
with their standards. Standardized data collection from CoC-­
accredited healthcare centers is used to measure quality,
outcomes, and treatment patterns. That data is fed into the
National Cancer Database (NCDB), which compiles clinical
data into quarterly reports for all CoC facilities and has hos-
pital benchmark reports and a Cancer Quality Improvement
Program (CQIP) database that includes short-term and lon-
gitudinal data released annually. Access to the NCDB, CoC,
and CQIP can be applied for, but you must be affiliated with
an institution that is a member of a CoC-accredited program
to be eligible for access.
230   B. J. Nasca et al.

 se of a Large National Database
U
for Continuous Evaluation of Quality
in Surgical Care
Numerous studies have shown that participation in the ACS-­
NSQIP is associated with longitudinal improvement in post-
operative mortality and morbidity, even without specific
efforts taken to improve outcome (so called “Hawthorne
effect”) [20–22]. However, high-quality studies comparing
results for ACS-NSQIP participant and nonparticipant hospi-
tals revealed no significant difference in mortality and com-
plication rates [23, 24]. Although all hospitals demonstrated
significant improvement in measured surgical outcomes
across time, there was no specific difference in the rate of
improvement between ACS-NSQIP participating and non-
participating sites after rigorous matching of two groups and
robust risk adjustment measures [24].
   The most important limitation of any outcome-based qual-
ity improvement program is that measuring the end results
does not necessarily provide answers to improving outcomes.
Equivalent or even greater effort is required to identify and
implement changes to components of the healthcare system
that could potentially improve outcomes. Going back to the
more upstream elements of the Donabedian framework,
changes may need to happen at multiple levels of structure
and process to improve a particular outcome. For example,
what could be done to address surgical site infections (SSI)?
Perhaps we need to evaluate the existing preoperative, intra-
operative, and postoperative care for surgical patients. Are
patients managed with evidence-based practices periopera-
tively in order to effectively reduce SSI (Process)? Would a
preoperative SSI checklist help to mitigate SSI (Structure)?
Surgical care bundles that include evidence-based, multidisci-
plinary interventions effectively reduced the rate of SSIs
across multiple settings and patient populations [25, 26].
While specific interventions vary between bundles, the bun-
dle approach itself, implementing changes at both the process
   Chapter 13. The Current State of Surgical Outcome…     231

and structure level with continuous monitoring of outcomes,
is believed to drive the improvement in quality of care [25].
Furthermore, in order to implement and sustain these changes
in practice, responsible stakeholders including surgeons,
allied healthcare professionals, and policy makers must be
engaged at multiple levels.


Clinical Registries
Clinical registries are the bedrock of surgical outcomes
research and make up the single greatest resource for quality
improvement and surgical outcomes researchers in the USA
[27]. This category encompasses everything from individual
surgeon repositories where surgeons collect and record their
own surgical outcomes in a personalized database all the
way up to large nationally representative registries that use
complex sampling methodology and certified external chart
reviewers to estimate quality of care at the hospital level.
There are two critical components that determine our con-
fidence in findings derived from clinical registries: blinded
(versus unblinded) data collection and objective (versus
subjective) standardization of outcomes. When a surgeon is
collecting her/his own outcomes, there is an inherent desire
to underreport unwanted outcomes (e.g., surgical site infec-
tion) [28]. The degree to which this affects the outcome of
interest will vary by surgeon, by outcome, and over time,
but it is inherent to self-reported datasets and should be a
consideration when interpreting any results published from
self-­reported data. Blinding the data collection process from
the surgeon/researcher is a critical element of overcoming
our own inherent biases and should be considered whenever
possible in the design of quality improvement and research
efforts focused on improving surgical outcomes. The second
critical element is how a dataset defines a given outcome.
As an example, several nicely designed research studies have
demonstrated disagreement among surgeons on the definition
of a surgical site infection when presented with subjective
232   B. J. Nasca et al.

measures in case scenarios. Therefore, the objective com-
ponents and strict cutoffs for a given outcome definition
are critical to assuring comparison across studies or even
across groups within a study when data collection is not
centralized. For example, if one institution decides that all
patients who require the removal of at least one skin staple
to allow for drainage constitutes an infection and another
institution requires positive cultures, the dataset will have
markedly different surgical site infection rates that do not nec-
essarily reflect differences in the underlying patient outcomes.
Therefore, uniform definitions which rely entirely on objective
criteria (e.g., white blood cell count, positive cultures, tem-
perature cutoffs) will yield the most consistent results across
study populations and are a core principle of most large,
national patient registries.


Administrative Registries
Administrative registries compile the administrative and bill-
ing records across multiple hospitals and then make the data
available for assessment of patient outcomes. The largest
administrative registries are the Center for Medicare and
Medicaid Services (CMS) administrative claims databases.
These are composed of healthcare utilization data derived
from reimbursement/claims data and enrollment data from
either Medicare- or Medicaid-eligible patients across the
USA. CMS data includes demographic information, admis-
sion/discharge date, diagnoses, and procedure data as col-
lected for administrative and billing purposes of the hospitals.
While this offers enormous potential for surgical outcomes
researchers, it is important to recognize the data was col-
lected for operational purposes and not specifically for out-
come measurement. Many researchers have therefore
demonstrated the systematic underreporting of adverse
­outcomes such as surgical site infections or deep vein throm-
 boses [29]. Additionally, risk adjustment methods based on
 comorbidities will be at the mercy of accurate comorbidity
   Chapter 13. The Current State of Surgical Outcome…      233

documentation within the billing records. Therefore, comor-
bidities directly linked to increased reimbursement are likely
to be much more reliably recorded than those that are not
tied to increased reimbursement. This is a critical point to
consider when interpreting the results of studies based on
administrative databases, as certain research questions will be
profoundly affected while others will have this effect normal-
ized across groups. With 98% of persons over 65 enrolled in
Medicare, CMS administrative records are a rich dataset with
significant value despite their limitations.


Patient Safety Indicators
In 1989 the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
(AHRQ) was founded as part of the US government’s
Department of Health and Human Services. Its goal was to
improve healthcare through funding and facilitation of
research. Following the seminal publication of the Institute of
Medicine’s “To Err is Human,” the AHRQ was given a three-
fold task:

1. Identify the causes of preventable healthcare errors and
   patient injury in healthcare delivery.
2. Develop, demonstrate, and evaluate strategies for reducing
   errors and improving patient safety.
3. Disseminate such effective strategies throughout the
   healthcare industry.

   From the research funded by over 200 grants awarded by
the AHRQ to investigate improving patient safety, AHRQ
developed measures to identify patient safety issues to target
quality improvement efforts at the institutional level. CMS
currently uses 27 indicators developed by AHRQ in order to
create an institutional and provider level score for outcomes.
Collectively, these are referred to as the Patient Safety
Indicators (PSIs).
234   B. J. Nasca et al.

   The reports show the calculated rates of potential in-­
hospital complications and adverse events following surger-
ies, procedures, and childbirth utilizing administrative data.
As discussed above, administrative data is significantly influ-
enced by the quality and thoroughness of clinical documenta-
tion, and this has led to debates over the nuances of better
documentation versus the phenomenon of upcoding.
Administrative records also do not account for technical con-
siderations of a surgical case and therefore underrepresent
issues of case complexity.


Survey Instruments for Outcomes Assessment

Patient-Reported Outcomes

The FDA defines patient-reported outcomes (PROs) as “any
aspect of a patient’s health status that comes directly from the
patient (i.e., without the interpretation of the patient’s
responses by a physician or anyone else) [30, 31].” PROs were
first developed in 1963 with the advent of Health-Related
Quality of Life (HRQL) measures, but they played a limited
role in medical care until more recently. PROs have become
increasingly popular, and they contribute significantly to the
approval process for pharmaceutical drugs, and almost 30% of
clinical trials between 2007 and 2013 included PROs [32]. As
PROs become more standardized, they will likely continue to
increase in significance in the future [32]. One limitation of
PROs is that they have issues with standardization and gener-
alization across diseases and interventions [30, 31, 33], and this
in part has limited their routine integration into surgical care.


Patient-Reported Outcome Measurement System

In an attempt to standardize patient-reported outcomes, US
scientists from multiple institutions and representatives from
the National Institutes of Health (NIH) formed a group with
the goal to “develop and evaluate, for the clinical research
    Chapter 13. The Current State of Surgical Outcome…       235

community, a set of publicly available, efficient, and flexible
measurements of PROs, including HRQL” [30, 31]. They pro-
duced Patient-Reported Outcome Measurement System
(PROMIS), which established a national resource for mea-
surement of patient-reported function, symptoms, and HRQL
in a precise and efficient manner that could be applied to a
broad disease and condition set. This made PROs much eas-
ier to measure for researchers. PROMIS has five main
domains: pain, fatigue, emotional distress, physical function,
and social function. These domains were developed through
a large study of 11 databases to evaluate how each domain fit
with already-published patient-reported data [30, 31]. Each
domain is tied to a questionnaire with strong correlation to
well-established questionnaires like the SF-36, and they have
long and short forms [30, 31].


Press Ganey Surveys

In 1984, Drs. Press and Ganey created a validated survey with
the goal of improving quality, safety, and cost of care. The
survey integrates Hospital Consumer Assessment of
Healthcare Providers (HCAHP) survey questions with their
questions. The Press Ganey and HCAHP questions rely heav-
ily on patient satisfaction for things like nursing care and
have led to changes to improve patient satisfaction [34]. Their
impact on the quality of medical care has been called into
question because some practitioners believe hospitals are
spending a greater time increasing patient satisfaction instead
of increasing quality of care [34]. The hospital-level indicators
are not necessarily indicative of hospital outcomes.


 se of Patient-Reported Outcome Measures
U
(PROMs) to Evaluate Surgical Outcomes
The majority of past surgical outcomes research focused on
quantifiable measures, such as mortality, complication rates,
and length of stay [35]. However, these outcomes may not be
236   B. J. Nasca et al.

the most meaningful to patients and may not be aligned with
their priorities. Recovery after surgery is a dynamic and mul-
tifactorial process, with the patient as the primary stake-
holder [36]. Therefore, it is essential to incorporate patients’
perspective and subjective experience into surgical outcomes
research [37]. Advantages of PROMs include assessment of
various aspects of health, including physical and psychosocial
domains, from the patients’ perspective [36]; the ability to
track the recovery process in the short- and long-term period;
and empowering patients to manage their own health and
make well-informed treatment decisions that align with their
values [38]. Disadvantages of PROMs are that they are hard
to measure, are largely subjective and thus hard to make
meaningful statistical analysis on their results, and are needed
to be kept in databases that are both costly to maintain and
labor intensive.
    There is important discordance between traditional objec-
tive measures of surgical outcomes and patients’ lived experi-
ence following surgery, as measured by PROMs. For instance,
avoiding severe breast symptoms following breast cancer
surgery was a more important indicator of quality of care
over increased disease-free survival, especially for older age
groups [39]. Enhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS) proto-
cols, which have been associated with better objective out-
comes like shorter length of stay and decreased complication
rates, have not been associated with similar improvement in
patient-reported QoL, with report of increased emotional
distress among ERAS patients [40, 41]. To evaluate patients’
experience following surgery, surgical clinical trials have
increasingly adopted PROMs as primary outcomes in addi-
tion to standard, clinically oriented outcomes [42].
    The field of PROMs has further evolved with recent pub-
lication of official guidance regarding their use in evaluating
and labeling of medical products by the US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) and the European Medicines Agency
(EMA) [43, 44]. Development of PROMs is a rigorous and
protocol-driven process, where measures are evaluated for
essential properties that include the following [45]:
   Chapter 13. The Current State of Surgical Outcome…        237

1. Reliability: the degree to which instrument is free of mea-
   surement error, as reflected by its ability to produce the
   same result on repeated measurement for the same out-
   come level [46].
2. Validity: how well the instrument measures the outcome it
   is intended to measure [47]. There are different measures
   of validity, including content validity (extent to which items
   of PROM questionnaire reflect the most important aspects
   of outcome of interest in a given setting) [48], construct
   validity (degree to which PROM relates to other existing
   measures in a way that is consistent with a priori theoreti-
   cal hypotheses) [47], and criterion validity (how adequately
   the PROM reflects the existing gold standard) [49].
3. Responsiveness (i.e., sensitivity to change): degree to which
   PROM can detect changes in outcome being measured
   over time [50].
4. Practicality: time, cost, and effort required to administer,
   score, and interpret PROMs [51].
5. Interpretability of scores: ability to assign relevant and
   understandable meaning to PROM score [46].

   Systematic reviews of existing PROMs on recovery follow-
ing thoracic and abdominal surgery demonstrated a lack of
PROMs with sound measurement properties, signaling the
need for the development of higher-quality PROMs [37, 42,
52]. Psychometrically robust PROMs should be used in con-
junction with clinical outcomes to further drive patient-­
centered research and improvement in quality of surgical
care.
   The following PROM-cycle framework (see Fig. 13.1) can
be used to support selection, implementation, and evaluation
of PROMs by end users, such as clinicians, quality managers,
patient representatives, and other experts [53]. The frame-
work has been developed using existing national and interna-
tional tools for selection and use of PROMs with input from
end users who deemed the framework to be relevant and
feasible for implementation [53].
238    B. J. Nasca et al.



                               Determine objective
                                                    (a): Individual patient care
                                       1                 (b): Quality improvement
                                                             (c): Accountability
                                      Goal

Maintenance and     8                                              2 Select PROs
      evaluation




                                                           Selection
                        Use


                                PROM-cycle                              3 Select PROMs
      Use of the
         PROM      7

                                                                 4
                                   Indicator                      Test the PROM
                Test the       6
               indicator                        5                      Does not work
               Does not work                   Define the
                                                indicator

Figure 13.1 PROM-cycle framework. (Used with permission cour-
tesy of van der Wees et al. [53])

Phase 1: Goal

First, it is important to determine the objective that the
PROM is intended to achieve. The objective of using PROMs
in clinical practice is threefold: (a) to guide individual patient
care and shared decision-making, (b) to evaluate outcomes in
a group of patients to guide quality improvement initiatives,
and (c) to increase transparency by reporting outcomes to the
public and stakeholders [53, 54]. For instance, using PROMs
to evaluate QoL outcomes in patients who undergo ­pulmonary
resection for suspected malignant tumors can assist individ-
ual patients in selecting the most appropriate treatment,
advocate for change in practice, and compare quality of care
across institutions.
   Chapter 13. The Current State of Surgical Outcome…       239

Phase 2: Selection

A PROM that best addresses the predetermined objective
should then be selected. When selecting an appropriate QoL
scale to evaluate postoperative recovery, the PROM should
be assessed for its psychometric properties and ability to
detect clinically meaningful difference across treatment
groups and time. There are two main types of QoL measures:
generic scales and condition-specific scales.
   Generic scales assess a wide range of health-related QoL
issues and can therefore be applicable to a broad population,
including the general population. Thus, generic scales can
compare a target population to other populations. However,
given the broad nature of questions, generic scales may not be
specific enough to detect subtle changes in QoL. A common
example of a generic QoL scale is the EuroQol-5 dimensions
(EQ-5D), which is widely used to describe and value health
across numerous health conditions across five dimensions:
mobility, self-care, usual function status, pain/discomfort, and
anxiety/depression [55]. When tested for its validity and
responsiveness among patients undergoing pulmonary resec-
tion for cancer, the EQ-5D was limited in detecting changes
in QoL across time as predicted by a priori hypothesis (poor
responsiveness) and between patient groups (poor discrimi-
nant validity) [56].
   Specialized scales are developed to assess QoL associated
with a particular health condition. As such, their questions
are generally more targeted and responsive to change. An
example of a specialized scale designed for lung cancer is the
European Organization for Research and Treatment of
Cancer Quality of Life Questionnaire-Lung Cancer 29
(EORTC QLQ-LC29), which contains five multi-item scales
relevant to lung cancer patients, including surgery-related
symptoms [57]. Recently, an international, cross-cultural, mul-
ticenter phase IV study reported on psychometric properties
240    B. J. Nasca et al.

of EORTC QLQ-LC29, demonstrating excellent internal
consistency, reliability, responsiveness to change over time,
and group differences when comparing patients with low vs.
high performance status [58]. Thus, the EORTC QLQ-LC29
may be a more appropriate and sensitive measure to achieve
the goal of assessing postoperative recovery trajectory and
QoL in the target population.


Phase 3: Define the Indicator

After selecting an appropriate PROM, the outcome should
then be interpreted in relation to the quality of healthcare
delivered [53]. The utility of a quality indicator is in its ability
to monitor outcomes and provide actionable data [59]. For
QoL measures, “minimal clinically meaningful difference,”
which refers to the smallest difference in QoL score that is
considered to be clinically important, is generally used to
indicate significant findings used to guide treatment recom-
mendation and/or changes in practice [60].


Phase 4: Use

The PROM and associated quality indicator should be peri-
odically evaluated, verifying that it remains relevant and sensi-
tive to the target population and outcome(s) of interest as
practice guidelines change [53]. In fact, the conception of
EORTC QLQ-LC29 stemmed from the need to add new
items to the existing PROM (EORTC QLQ-LC13) in order to
assess effects and side effects of novel therapeutic options that
were recently made available for lung cancer patients [61].


Interpreting Outcome Measures
Effective outcome measurement studies can change clinical
practice, but accurate interpretation requires that we know
the data limitations. Although participation in large multi-­
    Chapter 13. The Current State of Surgical Outcome…        241

institutional databases attempts to reduce bias, the act of self-­
reporting in and of itself can lead to bias for the voluntary
programs. Surgeons already desire to do their best, and the
reported outcomes are collected by trained database staff, not
the surgeons.
   In addition, patients who undergo operations have a great
variation in comorbidities. The quality of data collected sig-
nificantly impacts whether the complexity of the patients is
captured in the databases. Despite the NSQIP risk calcula-
tor’s attempt to account for these comorbidities and associ-
ated risks, it cannot account for everything and is certainly
not infallible. The operation ultimately lies in the hands of the
surgeon on the individual patient. Each operation has its own
technical challenges, some much greater than others, and it is
not possible to accurately reflect this in large databases.
Given the various sources and quality of data in the large
databases, their data may be inconsistent.
   Mull et al. performed an analysis between VASQIP, SCIP,
and PSI measures for 67 VA hospitals and found at most a
very weak correlation or agreement between measures for
rating hospitals as high- or low-performing [27]. They make
the case for not using any one outcome measure but looking
at a range of outcome measures and understanding the use
for each one.


 valuating Surgical Innovation: Using the IDEAL
E
Framework (Table 13.1)
Outcomes research also plays a significant role in the field of
surgical innovation. In recent decades, surgical techniques
have evolved tremendously, from open to minimally invasive
surgery and further development of novel surgical approaches,
with constant focus on improving patient outcomes. Recent
innovations in surgical procedures have not been subject to
the same degree of rigorous regulation as for drug develop-
ment. The process of surgical innovation has been largely
unstructured and unregulated and is met with unique
Table 13.1 Characteristics of each stage of IDEAL framework
                                                                                                                    242

             Idea               Development          Exploration         Assessment          Long-term
Surgeons     Surgical           Early adopters       Larger surgical     Surgeons            Surgeons formally
             innovators                              community with      formally trained    trained and assessed
                                                     variable training   and assessed to     to perform novel
                                                     and expertise       perform novel       technique
                                                                         technique
                                                                                                                    B. J. Nasca et al.




Patient       Highly select    Select, but larger    International       Recruited           Enumerated
population    group of         group of patients     group of patients   patients assigned   patients who are
              patients                                                   to treatment        followed long-term
                                                                         group
Type of       Case reports     Prospective case      Prospective         Randomized          Long-term
study                          series from single    multicenter         controlled trials   population-based
                               center                cohort study                            observational
                                                                                             studies using
                                                                                             clinical registry/
                                                                                             administrative data
Objectives   Inform        Develop technical   Define correct      Study relative   Assess long-term
             surgeons of   aspects of          indication          benefit of       oncologic and
             safety +/−    procedure           Clarify potential   innovation       functional outcomes
             benefits of   Collaborative       harms and           compared to      and associated
             innovation    approach to         benefits            conventional     quality of life
             Report on     collect patient     Plan for future     approaches
             recurrent     outcome data        RCTs
             errors        and standardize     Establish
             requiring     procedure           optimal method
             further                           of training and
             refinement                        assessment
                                                                                                          Chapter 13. The Current State of Surgical Outcome…
                                                                                                          243
244   B. J. Nasca et al.

challenges, including a high degree of technical complexity
and significant individual variability among surgeons. To
ensure safety and efficacy, surgical innovation should undergo
robust evaluation that is guided by evidence-based principles.
The IDEAL framework is composed of five stages of evaluat-
ing and reporting surgical innovations: Idea, Development,
Exploration, Assessment, and Long-term [62]. It was devel-
oped by the IDEAL collaborative, composed of surgeons,
methodologists, clinical trialists, ethicists, journal editors, and
health technology assessment professionals, with the aim of
developing an integrated and thorough evaluation pathway
for surgical and other complex interventions [63]. IDEAL
also promotes high-quality, prospective research design to
rigorously test new procedures, with the intention of prevent-
ing widespread implementation before proper assessment
has taken place.
   A good example of how the IDEAL framework has
guided implementation of novel surgical technique can be
found in the development of transanal total mesorectal exci-
sion (TaTME) for rectal cancer. The transanal component of
the procedure aims to overcome the limitations of transab-
dominal approach where dissection of the mid- and distal
rectum is often challenged by poor visualization of planes,
especially in the narrow and deep pelvis. While this innova-
tive approach may offer technical advantages, it is essential to
evaluate whether this novel procedure can also offer ade-
quate oncologic results, risk of complications, and QoL for
patients undergoing the procedure.

Idea The first clinical phase consists of a “proof of concept,”
where a group of surgeon innovators perform the novel
surgical procedure on a small number of select patients. This
phase is often preceded by a preclinical phase, where a
technique is first attempted and practiced on animal models
and human cadavers. Whiteford was the first surgeon to
describe the use of natural orifice transluminal endoscopic
surgery (NOTES) in colorectal surgery, which was later tested
    Chapter 13. The Current State of Surgical Outcome…        245

in pigs and cadavers and achieved successful excision of intact
mesorectum, as well as reduced operative times [64–66]. The
first clinical cases of TaTME were performed between 2010
and 2012 by Sylla and Lacy on low-risk rectal cancer patients
and reported complete TME specimens with negative margins
and uneventful postoperative course [65, 66].

Development Following proof of safety and potential benefit
of TaTME as demonstrated in early case series, surgeons who
are “early adopters” in the field started to take up the
procedure and gain personal experience, leading to the
Development phase. In this second phase, the procedure is
still performed on select but larger groups of patients,
following institutional review board approval, and their
outcomes are collected and reported in a prospective manner
[62]. Various technical modifications and equipment changes
are made while troubleshooting to further refine the
procedure. The key aspect of this phase is the collaboration
among surgeons across different centers and countries, as well
as collaboration with industry, to refine technical aspects of
the procedure, maximize the understanding of available
devices, and foster technical innovation to make the procedure
easier to perform.

Exploration After achieving technical improvement and
standardization, attention is shifted to understanding the
benefits and potential harms of surgical innovation.
Prospective, observational studies involving a larger number
of patients from single or multiple practices are performed.
A clinical registry of cases is critical in collecting data during
the exploration and future stages and should be established
if possible to track and learn from early outcomes and
provide longer-term data. In this example of TaTME, the
international TaTME Registry was launched in 2014 and
involved data input from surgeons across the world with
varying levels of expertise [67]. Another essential aspect of
the exploration phase is establishing an optimal method of
246   B. J. Nasca et al.

teaching and evaluating surgeons who will be adopting the
technique with its widespread implementation. In this
example of TaTME, a consensus recommendation was
proposed by Francis and colleagues, which describes a formal
curriculum that involves online modules, simulated training,
and formative assessment of competency that is led by a
surgeon trained in laparoscopic colorectal surgery with prior
experience in transanal surgery [68].

Assessment Does this new surgical procedure with promising
early results in terms of safety and patient outcomes also offer
advantage over existing, conventional procedures? The
Assessment phase aims to answer this question using properly
conducted randomized controlled trials (RCT) as the
preferred method of study [62]. Again using the TaTME
example, three RCTs are currently underway. The overall goal
of these trials is to validate the safety and efficacy of TaTME
in comparison with conventional procedures for rectal cancer
treatment [69].

Long-term studies The focus of the last stage is evaluation of
long-term outcomes related to patient QoL, function, and
oncological status. The major advantage of setting up a
registry early on in evaluation of innovative surgical
procedures is that registered patients can be followed long
term to assess for outcomes of interest. The international
TaTME registry, in conjunction with ongoing trials mentioned
above, could be used to track oncological outcomes as well as
bowel, sexual, and urinary function and associated QoL,
which are of utmost interest among rectal cancer patients.

   Although evaluation of TaTME followed steps to adhere
to IDEAL framework, a major deviation occurred when sur-
geons who did not undergo formative training and assess-
ment rapidly adopted this complex procedure, in the absence
of robust evidence of safety and efficacy obtained through
   Chapter 13. The Current State of Surgical Outcome…      247

RCTs [70]. One can only harken back to the rapid adoption
of laparoscopic cholecystectomy and the sharp increase in
bile duct injuries as an example of this phenomenon. A recent
Delphi consensus reflecting collaborative input from 14 inter-
national colorectal societies provided guidance on safe adop-
tion and practice of TaTME [71]. Continuous monitoring and
critical evaluation by an international body of expert sur-
geons and stakeholders are essential in the process of surgical
innovation.


Future Methods
Multiple new methods for surgical outcome measurement are
on the horizon. Patient-generated outcomes using wearable
technology like the single use Zio Patch for 14-day continu-
ous ECG monitoring using an adhesive patch [72] have great
promise. Technologies like these bring measures that are
more objective to clinicians and researchers and make data
capture more convenient for patients. The technology is
expanding to allow for data tracking and clinical intervention
in real time, and our data storage capacity is growing to
enable large warehousing of population-level statistics.
   In addition to clinical data capture, several smartphone
applications are currently being used to collect patient-­
generated health data in real time and improve clinical care.
The GetWell Loop system allows for automated check-ins
and reminders to patients, which has already increased
knowledge about postoperative opioid use and disposal [73].
There are challenges to analyzing and validating such data
that are unique to interrupted time series and go beyond the
scope of this chapter, but the data capture technology holds
significant promise for enhanced surgical outcome data
research in the future.
   As discussed above, definitions of clinical outcomes can
vary and diminish the value of using a given outcome such as
248   B. J. Nasca et al.

surgical site infection. With greater technological integration,
documentation of incisions and wounds can now be taken by
smartphones and uploaded directly to the medical record
either remotely or in a clinical setting. Reliance on more
objective documentation like photos can push the medical
community toward a greater standardization. Simply inte-
grating more image capture capabilities can allow for more
consistent assessment of wound changes over time, remote
assessment of wounds, and possibly verification of surgical
site infections in databases and clinical trials or by quality
oversight committees. This would remove the subjectivity
inherent in individual assessment.
   In addition to static images, video capture of laparoscopic
surgeries has become commonplace, as well as video moni-
toring of operating rooms. “Black box” systems, similar to
those in airplanes, have been proposed and implemented at
some institutions. Their ultimate goal is to reduce adverse
events and improve outcomes. Jung et al. evaluated a black
box system with over 100 cases reviewed by trained analysts
and found a median of 20 errors and 8 events in each case
[74]. Clearly there are many unanswered questions regarding
the ethics, potential positives, and potential negatives of
video capture in the surgical setting, but this technology is
poised to fundamentally change surgical outcomes research.
   Finally, many technology experts and researchers agree
artificial intelligence (AI) will become a significant contribu-
tor to medical and surgical care [75]. Currently machine
learning, or “deep learning,” is being developed in order to
assist with recognition of skin cancer [76]. These same con-
cepts can be applied to many other aspects of surgery includ-
ing diagnosis, monitoring, reporting of outcomes, or even
predicting outcomes. The exact role that AI will play in surgi-
cal outcomes assessment and review is yet to be determined,
but it is easy to see how these advancements in machine
learning may increase the speed at which we recognize
adverse outcomes and potentially help us to prevent them.
   Chapter 13. The Current State of Surgical Outcome…         249

Conclusion
Health services research is an important driver of value-­
based and patient-centered care. Out of the three quality
indicators, outcomes are the most reflective of the impact of
healthcare on patients and therefore are the best target for
quality improvement efforts. Surgical outcomes research has
grown tremendously in the past two decades through national-­
level reporting and feedback of procedure-specific outcome
data across increasing numbers of collaborating sites.
However, in order to lead to meaningful changes, outcome
measurements must further be translated to changes in prac-
tice and culture at multiple levels. Furthermore, clinical out-
comes should be used in conjunction with PROMs that
reflect patients’ values and needs, to drive patient-centered
research and improvement in quality of surgical care.
Evaluation of surgical innovation through the IDEAL frame-
work provides an example of how outcomes research could
effectively drive a change in practice to improve patient care.
Outcomes specific to each stage of development serve as
checkpoints to ensure safety and efficacy of surgical innova-
tion. Therefore, surgical outcomes are not only the final
results but also measures that are most useful when comple-
mented by attempts to improve care while undergoing con-
stant and critical evaluation. As outcome measurements
improve and advance, outcomes researchers and quality
improvement specialists have greater opportunities to ana-
lyze high-quality data. This data will continue increasing in
quality with EMR integration, machine learning techniques,
and video/image capture integration.


References
1. What is health services research? Agency for Healthcare
   Research and Quality. 2002. https://archive.ahrq.gov/about/wha-
   tis.pdf.
2. Hicks CW, Makary MA. A prophet to modern medicine: Ernest
   Amory Codman. BMJ. 2013;347:f7368.
250    B. J. Nasca et al.

 3. Gai Y, Pachamanova D. Impact of the Medicare hospital read-
    missions reduction program on vulnerable populations. BMC
    Health Serv Res. 2019;19(1):837.
 4. Donabedian A. Evaluating the quality of medical care. 1966.
    Milbank Q. 2005;83(4):691–729.
 5. Munday GS, et al. Impact of implementation of the Surgical
    Care Improvement Project and future strategies for improving
    quality in surgery. Am J Surg. 2014;208(5):835–40.
 6. Wu AK, Auerbach AD, Aaronson DS. National incidence and
    outcomes of postoperative urinary retention in the Surgical Care
    Improvement Project. Am J Surg. 2012;204(2):167–71.
 7. Dimick JB, Welch HG. The zero mortality paradox in surgery. J
    Am Coll Surg. 2008;206(1):13–6.
 8. Dimick JB, Welch HG, Birkmeyer JD. Surgical mortality as an
    indicator of hospital quality: the problem with small sample size.
    JAMA. 2004;292(7):847–51.
 9. Iezzoni LI. The risks of risk adjustment. JAMA.
    1997;278(19):1600–7.
10. Khuri SF, Daley J, Henderson WG. The comparative assessment
    and improvement of quality of surgical care in the Department
    of Veterans Affairs. Arch Surg. 2002;137(1):20–7.
11. Roberts JS, Coale JG, Redman RR. A history of the joint com-
    mission on accreditation of hospitals. JAMA. 1987;258(7):936–40.
12. Khuri SF, Daley J, Henderson W, Hur K, Demakis J, Aust JB,
    Chong V, Fabri PJ, Gibbs JO, Grover F, Hammermeister K, Irvin
    G, Mcdonald G, Passaro E, Phillips L, Scamman F, Spencer J,
    Stremple JF. The Department of Veterans Affairs’ NSQIP. Ann
    Surg. 1998;228:491–507.
13. Ingraham AM, et al. Quality improvement in surgery: the
    American College of Surgeons national surgical quality improve-
    ment program approach. Adv Surg. 2010;44(1):251–67.
14. Massarweh NN, Kaji AH, Itani KM. Practical guide to surgi-
    cal data sets: Veterans Affairs Surgical Quality Improvement
    Program (VASQIP). JAMA Surg. 2018;153(8):768–9.
15. Khuri SF, et al. Risk adjustment of the postoperative mortality
    rate for the comparative assessment of the quality of surgical
    care: results of the National Veterans Affairs Surgical Risk Study.
    J Am Coll Surg. 1997;185(4):315–27.
16. Fink AS, et al. The National Surgical Quality Improvement
    Program in non-veterans administration hospitals: initial demon-
    stration of feasibility. Ann Surg. 2002;236(3):344–53; discussion
    353-4.
    Chapter 13. The Current State of Surgical Outcome…              251

17. Khuri SF, et al. Successful implementation of the Department
    of Veterans Affairs’ National Surgical Quality Improvement
    Program in the private sector: the patient safety in surgery study.
    Ann Surg. 2008;248(2):329–36.
18. Bilimoria KY, Liu Y, Paruch JL, Zhou L, Kmiecik TE, Ko
    CY, Cohen ME. Development and evaluation of the univer-
    sal ACS NSQIP surgical risk calculator: a decision aid and
    informed consent tool for patients and surgeons. J Am Coll Surg.
    2013;217(5):833–42.
19. Cohen ME, et al. Optimizing ACS NSQIP modeling for evalua-
    tion of surgical quality and risk: patient risk adjustment, proce-
    dure mix adjustment, shrinkage adjustment, and surgical focus. J
    Am Coll Surg. 2013;217(2):336–46.e1.
20. Maggard-Gibbons M. The use of report cards and outcome mea-
    surements to improve the safety of surgical care: the American
    College of Surgeons National Surgical Quality Improvement
    Program. BMJ Qual Saf. 2014;23(7):589–99.
21. Hall BL, et al. Does surgical quality improve in the American
    College of Surgeons National Surgical Quality Improvement
    Program: an evaluation of all participating hospitals. Ann Surg.
    2009;250(3):363–76.
22. Ingraham AM, et al. Quality improvement in surgery: the
    American College of Surgeons National Surgical Quality
    Improvement Program approach. Adv Surg. 2010;44:251–67.
23. Etzioni DA, et al. Association of hospital participation in a surgi-
    cal outcomes monitoring program with inpatient complications
    and mortality. JAMA. 2015;313(5):505–11.
24. Osborne NH, et al. Association of hospital participation in a
    quality reporting program with surgical outcomes and expendi-
    tures for medicare beneficiaries. JAMA. 2015;313(5):496–504.
25. Tanner J, et al. Do surgical care bundles reduce the risk of surgi-
    cal site infections in patients undergoing colorectal surgery? A
    systematic review and cohort meta-analysis of 8,515 patients.
    Surgery. 2015;158(1):66–77.
26. Carter EB, et al. Evidence-based bundles and cesarean delivery
    surgical site infections: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
    Obstet Gynecol. 2017;130(4):735–46.
27. Mull HJ, Chen Q, Shwartz M, Itani KM, Rosen AK. Measuring
    surgical quality: which measure should we trust? JAMA Surg.
    2014;149(11):1210–2.
252    B. J. Nasca et al.

28. Henry LR, von Holzen UW, Minarich MJ, Hardy AN, Beachy WA,
    Franger MS, Schwarz RE. Quality measurement affecting surgi-
    cal practice: utility versus utopia. Am J Surg. 2018;215(3):357–66.
29. Baser O, Supina D, Sengupta N, Wang L, Kwong L. Clinical and
    cost outcomes of venous thromboembolism in Medicare patients
    undergoing total hip replacement or total knee replacement sur-
    gery. Curr Med Res Opin. 2011;27(2):423–9.
30. Cella D, Riley W, Stone A, Rothrock N, Reeve B, Yount
    S, Amtmann D, Bode R, Buysse D, Choi S, Cook K. The
    Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement Information
    System (PROMIS) developed and tested its first wave of adult
    self-reported health outcome item banks: 2005–2008. J Clin
    Epidemiol. 2010;63(11):1179–94.
31. Cella D, Yount S, Rothrock N, Gershon R, Cook K, Reeve B, Ader
    D, Fries JF, Bruce B, Rose M, PROMIS Cooperative Group. The
    Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System
    (PROMIS): progress of an NIH roadmap cooperative group dur-
    ing its first two years. Med Care. 2007;45(5 Suppl 1):S3.
32. Rivera SC, Kyte DG, Aiyegbusi OL, Slade AL, McMullan C,
    Calvert MJ. The impact of patient-reported outcome (PRO)
    data from clinical trials: a systematic review and critical analysis.
    Health Qual Life Outcomes. 2019;17(1):156.
33. Katz S, Ford AB, Moskowitz RW, Jackson BA, Jaffe MW. Studies
    of illness in the aged: the index of ADL: a standardized measure of
    biological and psychosocial function. JAMA. 1963;185(12):914–9.
34. Urden LD. Patient satisfaction measurement: current issues and
    implications. Lippincotts Case Manag. 2002;7(5):194–200.
35. Neville A, et al. Systematic review of outcomes used to evaluate
    enhanced recovery after surgery. Br J Surg. 2014;101(3):159–70.
36. Lee L, et al. What does it really mean to “recover” from an
    operation? Surgery. 2014;155(2):211–6.
37. Fiore JF Jr, et al. How do we value postoperative recov-
    ery?: a systematic review of the measurement properties of
    patient-reported outcomes after abdominal surgery. Ann Surg.
    2018;267(4):656–69.
38. Griggs CL, et al. Patient-reported outcome measures: a stetho-
    scope for the patient history. Ann Surg. 2017;265(6):1066–7.
39. Kool M, et al. Importance of patient reported outcome measures
    versus clinical outcomes for breast cancer patients evaluation on
    quality of care. Breast. 2016;27:62–8.
40. Khan S, et al. Quality of life and patient satisfaction with
    enhanced recovery protocols. Color Dis. 2010;12(12):1175–82.
    Chapter 13. The Current State of Surgical Outcome…              253

41. Delaney CP, et al. Prospective, randomized, controlled trial
    between a pathway of controlled rehabilitation with early
    ambulation and diet and traditional postoperative care after
    laparotomy and intestinal resection. Dis Colon Rectum.
    2003;46(7):851–9.
42. Macefield RC, Avery KNL, Blazeby JM. Integration of clinical
    and patient-reported outcomes in surgical oncology. Br J Surg.
    2012;100(1):28–37.
43. Health, U.D.o, et al. Guidance for industry: patient-reported
    outcome measures: use in medical product development to sup-
    port labeling claims: draft guidance. Health Qual Life Outcomes.
    2006;4:1–20.
44. Venkatesan P. New European guidance on patient-reported out-
    comes. Lancet Oncol. 2016;17(6):e226.
45. Reeve BB, et al. ISOQOL recommends minimum standards for
    patient-reported outcome measures used in patient-centered
    outcomes and comparative effectiveness research. Qual Life
    Res. 2013;22(8):1889–905.
46. Lohr KN. Assessing health status and quality-of-life instruments:
    attributes and review criteria. Qual Life Res. 2002;11(3):193–205.
47. Terwee CB, et al. Quality criteria were proposed for mea-
    surement properties of health status questionnaires. J Clin
    Epidemiol. 2007;60(1):34–42.
48. Frost MH, et al. What is sufficient evidence for the reliability and
    validity of patient-reported outcome measures? Value Health.
    2007;10:S94–S105.
49. Mokkink LB, et al. The COSMIN study reached international
    consensus on taxonomy, terminology, and definitions of mea-
    surement properties for health-related patient-reported out-
    comes. J Clin Epidemiol. 2010;63(7):737–45.
50. Hays R, Hadorn D. Responsiveness to change: an aspect of
    validity, not a separate dimension. Qual Life Res. 1992;1(1):73–5.
51. Fernandez B, Dore L, Velanovich V. Patient-centered out-
    comes in surgical research and practice. J Gastrointest Surg.
    2017;21(5):892–5.
52. Pompili C, et al. Patients reported outcomes in thoracic surgery.
    J Thorac Dis. 2018;10(2):703–6.
53. van der Wees PJ, et al. Development of a framework with tools
    to support the selection and implementation of patient-reported
    outcome measures. J Patient Rep Outcomes. 2019;3(1):75.
54. Black N. Patient reported outcome measures could help trans-
    form healthcare. BMJ. 2013;346:f167.
254    B. J. Nasca et al.

55. Devlin NJ, Brooks R. EQ-5D and the EuroQol group:
    past, present and future. Appl Health Econ Health Policy.
    2017;15(2):127–37.
56. Bejjani J, et al. Validity of the EuroQol-5 dimensions as a
    measure of recovery after pulmonary resection. J Surg Res.
    2015;194(1):281–8.
57. Koller M, et al. An international study to revise the EORTC
    questionnaire for assessing quality of life in lung cancer patients.
    Ann Oncol. 2017;28(11):2874–81.
58. Koller M, et al. Psychometric properties of the updated EORTC
    module for assessing quality of life in patients with lung cancer
    (QLQ-LC29): an international, observational field study. Lancet
    Oncol. 2020;21(5):723–32.
59. Nothacker M, et al. Reporting standards for guideline-based
    performance measures. Implement Sci. 2016;11:6.
60. Hays RD, Woolley JM. The concept of clinically meaning-
    ful difference in health-related quality-of-life research.
    PharmacoEconomics. 2000;18(5):419–23.
61. Koller M, et al. Use of the lung cancer-specific quality of life
    questionnaire EORTC QLQ-LC13 in clinical trials: a systematic
    review of the literature 20 years after its development. Cancer.
    2015;121(24):4300–23.
62. McCulloch P, et al. No surgical innovation without evaluation:
    the IDEAL recommendations. Lancet. 2009;374(9695):1105–12.
63. Hirst A, et al. No surgical innovation without evaluation: evolu-
    tion and further development of the IDEAL framework and
    recommendations. Ann Surg. 2019;269(2):211–20.
64. Telem DA, et al. Transanal rectosigmoid resection via natural
    orifice translumenal endoscopic surgery (NOTES) with total
    mesorectal excision in a large human cadaver series. Surg
    Endosc. 2013;27(1):74–80.
65. Whiteford MH, Denk PM, Swanström LL. Feasibility of radical
    sigmoid colectomy performed as natural orifice translumenal
    endoscopic surgery (NOTES) using transanal endoscopic micro-
    surgery. Surg Endosc. 2007;21(10):1870–4.
66. Sylla P, et al. Survival study of natural orifice translumenal endo-
    scopic surgery for rectosigmoid resection using transanal endo-
    scopic microsurgery with or without transgastric endoscopic
    assistance in a swine model. Surg Endosc. 2010;24(8):2022–30.
67. Foundation, U.P.C., International TaTME Registry. 2014.
    Chapter 13. The Current State of Surgical Outcome…             255

68. Francis N, et al. Consensus on structured training curriculum
    for transanal total mesorectal excision (TaTME). Surg Endosc.
    2017;31(7):2711–9.
69. Rouanet P, et al. Rectal surgery evaluation trial: protocol for a
    parallel cohort trial of outcomes using surgical techniques for
    total mesorectal excision with low anterior resection in high-risk
    rectal cancer patients. Color Dis. 2019;21(5):516–22.
70. Roodbeen SX, et al. Evolution of transanal total mesorectal
    excision according to the IDEAL framework. BMJ Surg Interv
    Health Technol. 2019;1(1):e000004.
71. Hompes R, et al. International expert consensus guidance on
    indications, implementation and quality measures for Transanal
    Total Mesorectal Excision (TaTME). Color Dis. 2020;22:749–55.
72. Lobodzinski SS. ECG patch monitors for assessment of cardiac
    rhythm abnormalities. Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 2013;56(2):224–9.
73. Stulberg J, Huang R, Chao SY, Wickline VN, Schäfer W, Ko CY,
    Rosner B. Leveraging a digital care platform to drive quality
    improvement in postoperative opioid medication use. J Am Coll
    Surg. 2020;231(4):e19.
74. Jung JJ, Jüni P, Lebovic G, Grantcharov T. First-year analysis of
    the operating room black box study. Ann Surg. 2020;271(1):122–7.
75. Beam AL, Kohane IS. Big data and machine learning in health
    care. JAMA. 2018;319(13):1317–8.
76. Esteva A, Kuprel B, Novoa R, et al. Dermatologist-level clas-
    sification of skin cancer with deep neural networks. Nature.
    2017;542:115–8. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature21056.



Other Selected Reading
Bernardi MP, et al. Transanal total mesorectal excision: dissection tips
  using ‘O’s and ‘triangles’. Tech Coloproctol. 2016;20(11):775–8.
Calvert M, Kyte D, Price G, Valderas JM, Hjollund NH. Maximising
  the impact of patient reported outcome assessment for patients
  and society. BMJ. 2019;364:k5267.
Chen TY-T, et al. Bowel function 14 years after preoperative short-­
  course radiotherapy and total mesorectal excision for rectal can-
  cer: report of a multicenter randomized trial. Clin Colorectal
  Cancer. 2015;14(2):106–14.
256    B. J. Nasca et al.

Chow A, Mayer EK, Darzi AW, Athanasiou T. Patient-reported out-
   come measures: the importance of patient satisfaction in surgery.
   Surgery. 2009;146(3):435–43.
Cohen ME, Liu Y, Ko CY, Hall BL. An examination of American
   College of Surgeons NSQIP surgical risk calculator accuracy. J
   Am Coll Surg. 2017;224(5):787–95.
Deijen CL, et al. COLOR III: a multicentre randomised clinical trial
   comparing transanal TME versus laparoscopic TME for mid and
   low rectal cancer. Surg Endosc. 2016;30(8):3210–5.
Department of Veterans Affairs, Office of Data Governance
   and Analytics, Veteran Population Projection Model
   (VetPop). Veterans Benefits Administration; Veterans Health
   Administration, Office of the Assistant Deputy. Under Secretary
   for Health for Policy and Planning; 2016.
Dickson EA, et al. Carbon dioxide embolism associated with trans-
   anal total mesorectal excision surgery: a report from the interna-
   tional registries. Dis Colon Rectum. 2019;62(7):794–801.
Ferraris VA, Harris JW, Martin JT, Saha SP, Endean ED. Impact of
   residents on surgical outcomes in high-complexity procedures. J
   Am Coll Surg. 2016;222(4):545–55.
Fiore JF Jr, Figueiredo S, Balvardi S, Lee L, Nauche B, Landry T,
   Mayo NE, Feldman LS. How do we value postoperative recov-
   ery?: a systematic review of the measurement properties of
   patient-reported outcomes after abdominal surgery. Ann Surg.
   2018;267(4):656–69.
Gadan S, et al. Does a defunctioning stoma impair anorectal function
   after low anterior resection of the rectum for cancer? A 12-year
   follow-up of a randomized multicenter trial. Dis Colon Rectum.
   2017;60(8):800–6.
Hyer JM, White S, Cloyd J, Dillhoff M, Tsung A, Pawlik TM, Ejaz
   A. Can we improve prediction of adverse surgical outcomes?
   Development of a surgical complexity score using a novel
   machine learning technique. J Am Coll Surg. 2020;230(1):43–52.
Jones RS, Stukenborg GJ. Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement
   Information System (PROMIS) use in surgical care: a scoping
   study. J Am Coll Surg. 2017;224(3):245–54.
Lacy AM, et al. Minilaparoscopy-assisted transrectal low ante-
   rior resection (LAR): a preliminary study. Surg Endosc.
   2013;27(1):339–46.
Lelong B, et al. A multicentre randomised controlled trial to evalu-
   ate the efficacy, morbidity and functional outcome of endoscopic
   transanal proctectomy versus laparoscopic proctectomy for low-­
    Chapter 13. The Current State of Surgical Outcome…              257

   lying rectal cancer (ETAP-GRECCAR 11 TRIAL): rationale
   and design. BMC Cancer. 2017;17(1):253.
Motson RW, et al. Current status of trans-anal total mesorectal exci-
   sion (TaTME) following the second international consensus con-
   ference. Color Dis. 2016;18(1):13–8.
Nicholson G, et al. Optimal dissection for transanal total mesorectal
   excision using modified CO2 insufflation and smoke extraction.
   Color Dis. 2015;17(11):O265–7.
Penna M, et al. Four anastomotic techniques following trans-
   anal total mesorectal excision (TaTME). Tech Coloproctol.
   2016;20(3):185–91.
Penna M, et al. Transanal total mesorectal excision: international
   registry results of the first 720 cases. Ann Surg. 2017;266(1):111–7.
Penna M, et al. Incidence and risk factors for anastomotic failure
   in 1594 patients treated by transanal total mesorectal exci-
   sion: results from the international TaTME registry. Ann Surg.
   2019;269(4):700–11.
Pieniowski EHA, et al. Low anterior resection syndrome and quality
   of life after sphincter-sparing rectal cancer surgery: a long-term
   longitudinal follow-up. Dis Colon Rectum. 2019;62(1):14–20.
Smith AB, Schwarze ML. Translating patient-reported out-
   comes from surgical research to clinical care. JAMA Surg.
   2017;152(9):811–2.
Strengths and Limitations of CMS Administrative Data in
   Research. (n.d.). Retrieved from https://www.resdac.org/articles/
   strengths-­and-­limitations-­cms-­administrative-­data-­research.
Sylla P, et al. NOTES transanal rectal cancer resection using trans-
   anal endoscopic microsurgery and laparoscopic assistance. Surg
   Endosc. 2010;24(5):1205–10.
www.ahrq.gov.
www.facs.org/quality-­programs.
www.pressganey.com.
www.resdaq.org
Chapter 14
Developing Patient-­
Centered Outcomes
Metrics for Abdominal
Surgery
Julio F. Fiore, Fateme Rajabiyazdi, and Liane S. Feldman



Patient-centered care is a practice that emphasizes the active
involvement of patients in health decision-making and self-­
management, supported by research evidence addressing
outcomes that matter to patients [1–3]. Previous studies sug-
gest that involving patients in their care has the potential to
improve outcomes, enhance patient experience, and decrease
healthcare costs [4–6]. As surgery is one of the most frighten-
ing, disruptive, and expensive events in a care continuum,
surgical care can greatly benefit from a patient-centered
approach [7].
   In clinical practice, surgeons generally rely on clinician-­
centered outcome measures to define whether a surgical


J. F. Fiore (*) · L. S. Feldman
Department of Surgery, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada
e-mail: julio.fiorejunior@mcgill.ca; liane.feldman@mcgill.ca
F. Rajabiyazdi
Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton
University, Ottawa, ON, Canada
e-mail: rajabiyazdi@sce.carleton.ca

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature   259
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_14
260                           J. F. Fiore et al.

procedure was “successful.” This traditional approach involves
ascertaining that the procedure achieved its intended goal
(e.g., effective resection, repair or reconstruction of the dis-
eased structure) while avoiding complications (e.g., anasto-
motic leaks, surgical site infections). Also, clinicians are
motivated to avoid prolonged hospital length of stay (LOS)
and healthcare reutilization (i.e., emergency department vis-
its and hospital readmissions) as these events lead to increased
healthcare costs and, in the USA, may reduce reimbursement
for the health service provided [8]. While these traditional
metrics are obviously important, they do not capture the full
spectrum of surgical outcomes that are meaningful to patients.
    When assessing surgical outcomes, it is important to
acknowledge that surgery has short-term deleterious effects
on patients’ health status even in the absence of complica-
tions. For patients, major surgery is a major physiologic
stressor leading to a rapid health decline postoperatively
requiring weeks or months for full recovery (i.e., getting back
to “normal”) (Fig. 14.1) [9]. This health decline is primarily
caused by the surgical stress response, a cascade of metabolic
and hormonal events triggered by tissue trauma that is pro-
portional to the intensity of the intervention [10, 11]. When
complications occur, patients often experience delays in their
recovery, and some may never return to their preoperative



                                             Surgery
                           Preoperative
Level of health/function




                           health/function




                                                       Complications




                                                                       Time


Figure 14.1 Trajectory of postoperative recovery and impact of post-
operative complications. (Based on information from: Lee et al. [9])
   Chapter 14. Developing Patient-Centered Outcomes…         261

level of health (Fig. 14.1) [12, 13]. While recovering, patients
withdraw from household, leisure, and economic activities
and often require assistance with activities of daily living [14,
15]. In clinical practice, patients often inquire about the dura-
tion of recovery in terms of how long they will need to be
away from work, sports, and other activities. This is consistent
with research supporting that patients define postoperative
recovery as the ability to return to baseline levels of function
[16–18]. As such, the ability to quantify the period of recovery
after specific procedures would be relevant both in clinical
practice and for comparative effectiveness research. However,
recovery is a latent construct (i.e., not directly observable or
quantifiable [1]) that is difficult to measure [19]. The process
of recovery is highly dynamic and comprises multiple dimen-
sions of health (e.g., symptom experiences, functional status,
and well-being); therefore, it cannot be easily captured by a
single metric [9].
    In line with the principles of patient-centered care, recent
literature advocates that measurement of recovery needs to
include the patients’ voice through patient-reported outcome
(PRO) measures [9, 20–23]. In comparison with traditional
measures of surgical outcomes, PROs have the advantage of
allowing a broad assessment of recovery across various
patient-centered health domains, engaging patients as the key
stakeholders in the recovery process [19]. PROs generally
take the form of questionnaires that allow information
reported by patients to be translated into objective data that
can be more readily analyzed [23]. These questionnaires can
be completed at different time points, allowing a better
understanding of the recovery trajectory. In this chapter, we
will provide an overview about PROs, how they are d   ­ eveloped,
and summarize current evidence- and consensus-based rec-
ommendations for the use of PROs in surgical care. Our pri-
mary focus will be on PROs aimed to assess postoperative
recovery after abdominal surgery, but the concepts are
broadly applicable to the use of PROs to measure surgical
outcomes.
262   J. F. Fiore et al.

 hat Are Patient-Reported Outcome
W
Measures (PROMs)?
As per the classical definition by the US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA), a PRO is “any report of the status of
a patient’s health condition that comes directly from the
patient, without interpretation of the patient’s response by a
clinician or anyone else.” [24] Measurement of PROs is usu-
ally conducted via self-reported questionnaires known as
PRO measures (or PROMs). As the name suggests, PROMs
target aspects of health that are directly relevant to patients,
including symptoms, functional status, psychological status,
and participation in life activities. A PROM should capture
specific domains of health that are relevant to the construct
that is being measured (i.e., the underlying theme or subject
matter). For example, postoperative “pain” and “physical
function” are constructs commonly targeted by PROMs used
in surgical research. Each domain is evaluated by one or more
items (i.e., close-ended questions with specific response
options) that are counted and mathematically combined to
produce a summary score. Sometimes, PROMs are multidi-
mensional and contain multiple sub-scores, each representing
a different but related health domain. Examples of multidi-
mensional PROMs are generic health status questionnaires,
which produce different scores for specific domains such as
pain and physical and mental health [25]. These include
PROMs such as the Short Form (36) Health Survey (SF-36)
[26] and the World Health Organization Disability Assessment
Schedule (WHODAS 2.0) [27].
   PROMs can be generic or condition-specific. As the name
implies, generic PROMs are intended to measure general
aspects of health that are not specific to a particular disease
or condition [28]. Examples of generic PROMs that have
been used to quantify recovery after surgery are the above-
mentioned SF-36 [26] and WHODAS 2.0 [27], as well as the
Euro Qol Group 5 Dimension Instrument (EQ-5D) [29].
Traditionally, generic PROMs are used to compare self-­
reported health status across different patient populations
   Chapter 14. Developing Patient-Centered Outcomes…       263

and to compare data with population norms. Potential issues
related to the use of generic PROMs in the context of surgical
research are addressed later in this chapter. Condition-­
specific PROMs, on the other hand, address aspects of health
that are impacted by a specific disease or condition [28]. In
other words, they are developed to address issues that are
important for a specific patient population. Overall, they are
more suited than generic PROMs to detect changes in aspects
of health that are condition-specific. Examples of condition-­
specific PROMs that have been used in surgical outcomes
research include the European Organization for Research
and Treatment of Cancer QLQ-C30 (EORTC QLQ-C30)
questionnaire [30] and the Quality of Recovery measures
QOR-9, QOR-15, and QOR-40 [31].


 evelopment of PROMs and Assessment
D
of Measurement Properties
The development of a PROM is a complex and iterative pro-
cess that requires substantial time, resources, and expertise.
For too long, this process was seen as a simple activity that
merely required common sense (i.e., creating some questions,
intuitively judging their relevance, and attributing subjective
scores to responses); however, it is now well understood that
there is a great deal of science involved in developing good-­
quality PROMs and that their measurement properties
require careful consideration [32].
   Comprehensive guidelines have been published to direct
the process of PROM development by researchers [24, 33,
34]. For the purpose of this chapter, this process will be
divided in three phases: (1) content validity and item genera-
tion, (2) item evaluation and scale formation, and (3) assess-
ment of measurement properties.
   The aim of phase 1 is to establish the PROM’s content
validity (i.e., the degree to which the content of a PROM is an
adequate reflection of the construct to be measured [35]). To
many experts, content validity is the most important
264       J. F. Fiore et al.

measurement property of a PROM [36]. It is strongly recom-
mended by guidelines that content validity of a PROM be
supported by a conceptual framework, which includes a dia-
gram that explicitly defines the concepts measured by PROM
and how they relate to each other [24, 33]. The study by Alam
et al. [37], where patients from four different countries were
interviewed to elicit concepts relevant to the process of
recovery after abdominal surgery, presents a concrete exam-
ple of conceptual framework development (Fig. 14.2). Once a
conceptual framework has been developed, PROM question-
naire items reflecting the essence of the framework should be
generated through an iterative process of drafting, evaluation,


                                                                           Emotional functions
                                                                            Attention functions
                                                                        Energy and drive functions
                                                                             Sleep functions
                                                                            Sensation of pain
                                                                       Sensations associated with
                                                                     hearing and vestibular functions
                                                                        Repair functions of the skin
                                                                      Sensations related to the skin
                                        Mental functions                 Muscle power functions
                                   Sensory functions and pain               Urination functions
                                    Functions of the skin and               Digestive functions
                                    related structures                      Ingestion functions
                                   Neuromusculoskeletal and                Defecation functions
        Body functions             movement-related functions
                                                                      Sensations of digestive system
                                     Genitourinary functions
                                 Functions of the digestive system     Exercise tolerance functions

                                  Functions of the cardiovascular            Heart functions
                                     and respiratory systems             Blood pressure functions
                                                                           Respiration functions

        Recovery after
      abdominal surgery                                                  Carrying out daily routine
                                                                        Undertaking multiple tasks
                                                                                Handling
                                                                      stress/psychological demands
                                                                         Changing body position
                                   General tasks and demands
                                                                        Maintaining body position
                                             Mobility
  Activities and participation             Domestic life                Lifting and carrying objects
                                             Self-care                      Hand and arm use
                                    Interpersonal relationships                  Walking
                                     Community and social life               Moving around
                                                                                 Driving
                                         Major life areas
                                                                           Using transportation
                                                                             Doing housework
                                                                             Preparing meals
                                                                     Acquisition of goods and services
                                                                             Assisting others
                                                                             Washing oneself
                                                                          Caring for body parts
                                                                                Dressing
                                                                        Looking after one’s health
                                                                          Intimate relationships
                                                                         Recreation and leisure
                                                                        Remunerative employment




Figure 14.2 Conceptual framework of recovery after abdominal
surgery. (Based on data from: Alam et al. [37])
   Chapter 14. Developing Patient-Centered Outcomes…       265

and revision [34]. Patients’ understanding of the items should
be assessed via cognitive interviews [34]. The item pool (i.e.,
questions) created through this process (i.e., set of candidate
items that have not yet been “calibrated”) will comprise the
preliminary draft of the PROM.
   Phase 2 in the process of PROM development includes an
assessment of the quality of the items proposed, as well as the
development of scoring rules (algorithms). This assessment
requires that the PROM preliminary item pool be adminis-
tered to a large cohort of patients and analyzed psychometri-
cally. In recent years, measurement theory has evolved with
the use of modern psychometric techniques for item selection
and scoring, such as item-response theory (IRT) and Rasch
Measurement Theory (RMT). In brief, these techniques use a
range of diagnostic information (error estimates and fit statis-
tics) to determine whether adding the scores from a c­ ollection
of items is justified [38]. When using RMT, for example, items
can be eliminated or modified to “fit” what is expected in a
Rasch model (i.e., a statistical model that calibrates items in
a unidimensional scale) [39–41]. Traditional methods for
PROM development (e.g., classical test theory) use arbitrary
ordinal scales with no intrinsic meaning. Thus, response cate-
gories like “very good,” “good,” and “fair” are separated by
unknown distances, restricting interpretation, as the distance
from one category to the next may not be the same. In con-
trast, modern psychometric methods provide a nonlinear
transformation of ordinal scores into a common interval
scale, analogous to a ruler [38]. As a result, this approach
facilitates accurate and meaningful interpretation of changes
in PROM scores. Modern psychometric approaches also pro-
vide a basis for computer adaptive testing (CAT), the next-­
generation method of administering PROMs [42, 43]. In CAT,
PROM items are selected in real time to reflect answers
already given, thereby creating measures that are tailored to
the patient’s level of “ability,” resulting in a questionnaire
with fewer items and reduced patient burden [44, 45].
   In phase 3, after content validity and scoring algorithms
have been established, it is recommended that the PROM in
266   J. F. Fiore et al.

its final format be administered to a large patient cohort for
further assessment of measurement properties using tradi-
tional psychometric methods (i.e., classical test theory) [24].
In this phase, analyses using correlations and descriptive sta-
tistics evaluate measurement properties such as internal con-
sistency (the degree of interrelatedness among items),
reliability (the proportion of the total variance in scores
which is due to “true” differences between patients), mea-
surement error (deviations in scores that cannot be attributed
to “true” differences), structural validity (the degree to which
scores are an adequate reflection of the dimensionality of the
construct of interest), construct validity (the degree to which
the scores are consistent with hypotheses based on the
assumption that the PROM is actually measuring the con-
struct of interest), and responsiveness (the ability of a PROM
to detect change over time in the construct of interest) [46].
At this stage, cross-cultural validity can also be assessed (the
degree to which a translated or culturally adapted PROM is
an adequate reflection of the original version) [46]. This
analysis provides important information regarding external
validity that can be compared against the measurement prop-
erties of existing PROMs [24, 46]. Specific standards for the
assessment of PROM measurement properties has been pro-
posed by the COSMIN (COnsensus-based Standards for the
selection of health status Measurement INstruments) initia-
tive (https://www.cosmin.nl/).


 ritical Appraisal of PROMs Used
C
in Abdominal Surgery
The surgical literature is replete with “validated” PROMs, but
not all PROMs were created equally. In fact, a recent system-
atic review by Fiore et al. [32] suggested that there is limited
evidence supporting the measurement properties of PROMs
currently used in the context of postoperative recovery after
abdominal surgery. This review appraised a total of 22
   Chapter 14. Developing Patient-Centered Outcomes…        267

PROMs against quality standards proposed by COSMIN [47]
and identified major deficiencies in relation to content valid-
ity, internal consistency, reliability, construct validity, and
responsiveness, which are considered minimal standards for
the selection of PROMs for use in research and clinical prac-
tice [48].
    One major issue is that patient-centered assessment of
postoperative recovery has often relied on generic PROMs.
Although these PROMs are helpful for making comparisons
with population norms and other patient groups, they miss
important domains of health that are relevant for patients
undergoing abdominal surgery. For example, items related to
gastrointestinal dysfunction (e.g., tolerance of food, constipa-
tion) are not covered by generic PROMs frequently used in
the surgical literature (e.g., SF-36 and EQ-5D) despite being
considered relevant from the perspective of abdominal sur-
gery patients [37]. Due to their questionable content validity,
these PROMs have limited ability to detect changes in recov-
ery. Several generic PROMs also have long recall periods (the
period of time that patients are asked to consider when
responding PRO items, e.g., “last 4 weeks”) and, therefore,
may have limited ability to capture rapid changes in patients’
health condition postoperatively. As mentioned previously,
this may potentially be remediated by implementing PROMs
specifically focused on postoperative recovery. Although the
review by Fiore et al. [32] identified 16 recovery-specific
PROMs (11 focused on nonspecific surgical populations and
5 focused on abdominal surgery), most of these PROMs were
not developed using modern psychometric methods (IRT or
RMT), and evidence supporting their measurement proper-
ties in the context of abdominal surgery was limited. A
research program initiated at McGill University and sup-
ported by SAGES and other funders aims to bridge this
major knowledge gap by using state-of-the-art methodology
to develop a novel PROM to assess recovery after abdominal
surgery [37, 49].
268   J. F. Fiore et al.

 onsensus Recommendations for PROM Use
C
in Abdominal Surgery
While further research on this important topic emerges, con-
sensus recommendations have been proposed to support the
implementation of PROMs in surgical research and clinical
practice. In 2018, the American Society for Enhanced
Recovery (ASER) and the Perioperative Quality Initiative
(POQI) proposed a consensus statement on patient-reported
outcomes for use within enhanced recovery pathways. The
ASER/POQI statement makes relevant remarks regarding
the importance of selecting PROMs with an appropriate
recall period, suggesting that PROMs with short recall peri-
ods (24 h) be administered in the first days after surgery (i.e.,
during hospital stay) and PROMs with longer recall periods
(7 and/or 30 days) be used for assessment of long-term out-
comes (i.e., after hospital discharge). The statement empha-
sizes that PROMs should also be collected at baseline, before
surgery. Although ASER/POQI recognizes that, currently,
there is limited evidence supporting its measuring properties,
the Quality of Recovery 15 (QoR-15 [50]; recall period 24 h)
was recommended for use during the early postoperative
period. For assessment of long-term outcomes, the WHODAS
2.0 [51] (recall period 30 days) or PROMIS [52] (Patient-­
Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System,
recall period 7 days) were recommended. The latter is a
PROM measurement system developed as part of the
National Institutes of Health (NIH) Roadmap for Medical
Research. This system comprises a set of generic PROMs
targeting specific domains of health (e.g., pain intensity, pain
interference, fatigue) but also has multidimensional “pro-
files” targeting multiple domains (PROMIS-29, including
physical, mental, and social health). The PROMIS system has
the potential advantage of being developed using modern
psychometric methods (IRT), accommodating computer
adaptive testing, and being calibrated against US population
norms. However, the measurement properties of PROMIS
measures are yet to be determined in the context of
   Chapter 14. Developing Patient-Centered Outcomes…         269

postoperative recovery. Characteristics of the PROMs recom-
mended by the ASER/POQI statement are summarized in
Table 14.1.
   Other consensus statements covering PROM assessment
after surgery include the European Society of Anaesthesiology
(ESA) and Intensive Care Medicine (ESICM) outcomes task
force [53] and the Standardised Endpoints in Perioperative
Medicine (StEP) initiative [54, 55]. Both of these consensuses
corroborate the recommendation of QoR-15 as a measure of
short-term and WHODAS as a measure of long-term patient-­
centered postoperative outcomes.


 he Future of PROM Assessment in Abdominal
T
Surgery
Tracking postoperative recovery using PROMs is a means to
an end, but not the end itself. Achieving scientific and clinical
value, the ultimate goal, will occur when PROMs (1) take the
center stage in research assessing the comparative effective-
ness of interventions aimed to improve recovery after surgery
and (2) are used in clinical practice to fill the needs of
patients, caregivers, and payers who commonly seek informa-
tion about recovery expectations (i.e., will the patient resume
usual activities after surgery? how long will it take?). The
collection of PROM data through electronic platforms [i.e.,
mobile operating systems (i.e., mobile phones, tablets) and
web portals] may empower patients to track their own recov-
ery trajectory in real time and potentially identify
complications at a point when they may be more easily
­
treated. Also, electronic data collection may facilitate the use
of artificial intelligence (AI) techniques to process PROM
data. The use of AI may support patient-centered surgical
decision making by identifying patients who are at risk for a
slow/eventful postoperative recovery process [56].
   Using electronic platforms to collect PROM data is becom-
ing increasingly common. Electronic systems used to store and
collect such data are referred to as ePROMs [57]. The main
Table 14.1 Characteristics of the patient-reported outcome measures recommended by the American Society for Enhanced
                                                                                                                                                  270

Recovery and Perioperative Quality Initiative Joint consensus statement on patient-reported outcomes in an enhanced
recovery pathway
                                    Rating
                                    scale
                          Number of (response Scoring              Scores             Range of       Recall
Name           Type       items     options)     method            produced           scores         period     Available at:
Quality of     Condition- 15        Numeric      Score sum         Overall score      Total score    24 h       https://pubs.asahq.
                                                                                                                                                  J. F. Fiore et al.




Recovery-15    specific             rating scale                                      0–150 (worst              org/anesthesiology/
(QoR-15)                            (0–10)                                            to best)                  article/118/6/1332/11456/
                                                                                                                Development-­and-­
                                                                                                                Psychometric-­Evaluation-­
                                                                                                                of-­a

WHO            Generic   12-­item    Ordinal     12-item           12-­item           12-item         30 days   https://www.who.
Disability               version/36- scale       version: score    version: overall   version: 12–60            int/classifications/
Assessment               item        (5-point)   sum               score              (best to worst)           international-­classification-­
Schedule 2.0             version                 36-item           36-item            Total score:              of-­functioning-­
(WHODAS                                          version: simple   version: overall   simple scoring            disability-­and-­health/
2.0)                                             scoring (sum)     score and          36–180 (worst             who-­disability-­assessment-­
                                                 or complex        subscale scores    to best);                 schedule
                                                 scoring (item-    (cognition,        complex
                                                 response          mobility self-     scoring 0–100
                                                 theory)           care/hygiene,      (worst to best)
                                                                   getting along,     Subscale
                                                                   life activities,   scores: varies
                                                                   participation)
PROMIS      Generic   Varies   Varies   Item-response Varies   Varies   7 days   https://www.
measurement                             theory                                   healthmeasures.net/index.
system                                                                           php?option=com_content
                                                                                 &view=category&layout=b
                                                                                 log&id=147&Itemid=806
                                                                                                             Chapter 14. Developing Patient-Centered Outcomes…
                                                                                                             271
272   J. F. Fiore et al.

advantage of ePROMs is that they enable remote data collec-
tion and can facilitate data management and assessment by
patients, clinicians, and researchers [58]. As discussed earlier,
ePROMs also enable the use of computerized adaptive testing
(CAT), the next-generation method of administering PROMs
via automated selection of (fewer) items to reduce response
burden [59]. Research suggests that the use of ePROMs can
result in higher patient satisfaction, more accurate and com-
plete data collection, reduced administrative burden, and
lower costs [60]. However, ePROMs need to maintain equiva-
lent validity in comparison with paper-based PROMs [61].
Thus, when transforming a paper-­based instrument into an
ePROM, careful consideration is required to minimize changes
in the content and layout [62]. Furthermore, ePROMs’ design
should be accessible and have an efficient user interface. Such
interfaces should be developed using the principles of human-
centered design (i.e., with the involvement of patients and
healthcare providers) [60, 63].
   In the future, we envision that recovery-specific ePROM
data will be seamlessly integrated in electronic health records
(EHRs). This integration can be done using various
approaches, including full-integration, hybrid moderate-­
integration, or stand-alone low-integration [64]. With a full
integration, ePROMs can be incorporated as a part of the
secured EHR web platform where patients can view their
medical records and answer the ePROM questionnaires.
When a moderate hybrid approach is used, the ePROM is
presented in a separate platform linked from EHR, and the
ePROM data can be viewed in the EHR. Lastly, with the low-­
integration approach, the ePROM is incorporated in a stand-­
alone external website where patients enter their responses
and data can be viewed only via the external website. Future
work is required to study the advantages and disadvantages
of these ePROM integration approaches in terms of costs,
usability, and patient and provider satisfaction. The integra-
tion of PROMs in EHRs is in line with the principles of learn-
ing healthcare systems, where data gathered in clinical
practice are used in pragmatic studies to inform decision-­
   Chapter 14. Developing Patient-Centered Outcomes…           273

making, measure performance, and inform quality improve-
ment initiatives [65, 66].


Summary
As surgery enters the era of patient-centered care, it is advo-
cated that postoperative recovery be measured using PROMs
as they provide a means to incorporate patients’ perspectives
and experiences into research and clinical decision-making.
In abdominal surgery, this is currently precluded by the lack
of PROMs with sound measurement properties. While ongo-
ing studies aim to bridge this gap, guidelines are available to
direct the use of PROMs in perioperative care. There is a
great deal of research to be done before PROMs are fully
embraced by all stakeholders in surgery; however, the inte-
gration of PROM data in research and in daily practice has a
great potential to transform how we provide care for surgical
patients.


References
1. Mayo NE. Dictionary of quality of life and health outcomes
   measurement. 1st ed. Milwaukee: ISOQOL; 2015.
2. Barry MJ, Edgman-Levitan S. Shared decision making — the pin-
   nacle of patient-centered care. N Engl J Med. 2012;366(9):780–1.
3. Gabriel SE, Normand S-LT. Getting the methods right — the
   foundation of patient-centered outcomes research. N Engl J
   Med. 2012;367(9):787–90.
4. Greene J, Hibbard JH. Why does patient activation matter? An
   examination of the relationships between patient activation and
   health-related outcomes. J Gen Intern Med. 2012;27(5):520–6.
5. Marshall R, Beach MC, Saha S, et al. Patient activation and
   improved outcomes in HIV-infected patients. J Gen Intern Med.
   2013;28(5):668–74.
6. Munson GW, Wallston KA, Dittus RS, Speroff T, Roumie
   CL. Activation and perceived expectancies: correlations with
   health outcomes among veterans with inflammatory bowel dis-
   ease. J Gen Intern Med. 2009;24(7):809–15.
274    J. F. Fiore et al.

 7. Gray M, Meakins JL. Evidence-based surgical practice
    and patient-centered care: inevitable. Surg Clin North Am.
    2006;86(1):217–20.
 8. Borza T, Oerline MK, Skolarus TA, et al. Association of the hos-
    pital readmissions reduction program with surgical readmissions.
    JAMA Surg. 2018;153(3):243–50.
 9. Lee L, Tran T, Mayo NE, Carli F, Feldman LS. What does
    it really mean to “recover” from an operation? Surgery.
    2014;155(2):211–6.
10. Desborough JP. The stress response to trauma and surgery. Br J
    Anaesth. 2000;85(1):109–17.
11. Wilmore DW. From Cuthbertson to fast-track surgery: 70 years
    of progress in reducing stress in surgical patients. Ann Surg.
    2002;236(5):643–8.
12. Zhang LM, Hornor MA, Robinson T, Rosenthal RA, Ko CY,
    Russell MM. Evaluation of postoperative functional health sta-
    tus decline among older adults. JAMA Surg. 2020;155(10):950–8.
13. Stabenau HF, Becher RD, Gahbauer EA, Leo-Summers L,
    Allore HG, Gill TM. Functional trajectories before and after
    major surgery in older adults. Ann Surg. 2018;268(6):911–7.
14. Lawrence VA, Hazuda HP, Cornell JE, et al. Functional indepen-
    dence after major abdominal surgery in the elderly. J Am Coll
    Surg. 2004;199(5):762–72.
15. Lee L, Mata J, Ghitulescu GA, et al. Cost-effectiveness of
    enhanced recovery versus conventional perioperative manage-
    ment for colorectal surgery. Ann Surg. 2015;262(6):1026–33.
16. Berg K, Arestedt K, Kjellgren K. Postoperative recovery from
    the perspective of day surgery patients: a phenomenographic
    study. Int J Nurs Stud. 2013;50(12):1630–8.
17. Nilsson U, Jaensson M, Hugelius K, Arakelian E, Dahlberg
    K. A journey to a new stable state—further development of the
    postoperative recovery concept from day surgical perspective: a
    qualitative study. BMJ Open. 2020;10(9):e037755.
18. Kleinbeck SVM, Hoffart N. Outpatient recovery after laparo-
    scopic cholecystectomy. AORN J. 1994;60(3):394–8.
19. Lee L, Dumitra T, Fiore J Jr, Mayo N, Feldman L. How well are
    we measuring postoperative “recovery” after abdominal sur-
    gery? Qual Life Res. 2015;24:1–8.
20. Ljungqvist O, Rasmussen LS. Recovery after anaesthesia and
    surgery. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 2014;58(6):639–41.
21. Antonescu I, Mueller CL, Fried GM, Vassiliou MC, Mayo NE,
    Feldman LS. Outcomes reported in high-impact surgical jour-
    nals. Br J Surg. 2014;101(5):582–9.
   Chapter 14. Developing Patient-Centered Outcomes…                 275

22. Miller T, Mythen M. Successful recovery after major surgery:
    moving beyond length of stay. Perioper Med. 2014;3(1):4.
23. Davidson GH, Haukoos JS, Feldman LS. Practical guide to
    assessment of patient-reported outcomes. JAMA Surg.
    2020;155(5):432–3.
24. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Food and
    Drug Administration. Guidance for Industry. Patient-reported
    outcome measures: use in medical product development to
    support labeling claims. http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/
    Guidances/UCM193282.pdf. Published 2009. Accessed 23 Sept
    2020.
25. Olsen JA, Misajon R. A conceptual map of health-related qual-
    ity of life dimensions: key lessons for a new instrument. Qual
    Life Res. 2020;29(3):733–43.
26. Ware JE Jr. SF-36 health survey. In: The use of psychological
    testing for treatment planning and outcomes assessment. 2nd
    ed. Mahwah: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers; 1999.
    p. 1227–46.
27. Ustün TB, Chatterji S, Kostanjsek N, et al. Developing the World
    Health Organization disability assessment schedule 2.0. Bull
    World Health Organ. 2010;88(11):815–23.
28. Black N. Patient reported outcome measures could help trans-
    form healthcare. BMJ. 2013;346:f167.
29. Rabin R, Charro F. EQ-SD: a measure of health status from the
    EuroQol Group. Ann Med. 2001;33(5):337–43.
30. Aaronson NK, Ahmedzai S, Bergman B, et al. The European
    Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer QLQ-C30:
    a quality-of-life instrument for use in international clinical trials
    in oncology. JNCI. 1993;85(5):365–76.
31. Myles PS. More than just morbidity and mortality – quality
    of recovery and long-term functional recovery after surgery.
    Anaesthesia. 2020;75(S1):e143–50.
32. Fiore JF Jr, Figueiredo S, Balvardi S, et al. How do we value
    postoperative recovery?: a systematic review of the measure-
    ment properties of patient-reported outcomes after abdominal
    surgery. Ann Surg. 2018;267(4):656–69.
33. Patrick DL, Burke LB, Gwaltney CJ, et al. Content validity—
    establishing and reporting the evidence in newly developed
    patient-reported outcomes (PRO) instruments for medical prod-
    uct evaluation: ISPOR PRO good research practices task force
    report: part 1—eliciting concepts for a new PRO instrument.
    Value Health. 2011;14(8):967–77.
276    J. F. Fiore et al.

34. Patrick DL, Burke LB, Gwaltney CJ, et al. Content validity—
    establishing and reporting the evidence in newly developed
    patient-reported outcomes (PRO) instruments for medical
    product evaluation: ISPOR PRO good research practices task
    force report: part 2—assessing respondent understanding. Value
    Health. 2011;14(8):978–88.
35. Mokkink LB, Terwee CB, Patrick DL, et al. The COSMIN study
    reached international consensus on taxonomy, terminology,
    and definitions of measurement properties for health-related
    patient-reported outcomes. J Clin Epidemiol. 2010;63(7):737–45.
36. Terwee CB, Prinsen CAC, Chiarotto A, et al. COSMIN
    methodology for evaluating the content validity of patient-­
    reported outcome measures: a Delphi study. Qual Life Res.
    2018;27(5):1159–70.
37. Alam R, Montanez J, Law S, et al. Development of a conceptual
    framework of recovery after abdominal surgery. Surg Endosc.
    2020;34(6):2665–74.
38. Petrillo J, Cano SJ, McLeod LD, Coon CD. Using classical test
    theory, item response theory, and Rasch measurement theory to
    evaluate patient-reported outcome measures: a comparison of
    worked examples. Value Health. 2015;18(1):25–34.
39. Pallant JF, Tennant A. An introduction to the Rasch mea-
    surement model: an example using the Hospital Anxiety and
    Depression Scale (HADS). Br J Clin Psychol. 2007;46(1):1–18.
40. Tennant A, Conaghan PG. The Rasch measurement model
    in rheumatology: what is it and why use it? When should it
    be applied, and what should one look for in a Rasch paper?
    Arthritis Care Res. 2007;57(8):1358–62.
41. Hobart JC, Cano SJ, Zajicek JP, Thompson AJ. Rating scales as
    outcome measures for clinical trials in neurology: problems, solu-
    tions, and recommendations. Lancet Neurol. 2007;6(12):1094–105.
42. Hung M, Stuart AR, Higgins TF, Saltzman CL, Kubiak
    EN. Computerized adaptive testing using the PROMIS physi-
    cal function item bank reduces test burden with less ceil-
    ing effects compared with the short musculoskeletal function
    assessment in orthopaedic trauma patients. J Orthop Trauma.
    2014;28(8):439–43.
43. Gibbons RD, Weiss DJ, Kupfer DJ, et al. Using computerized
    adaptive testing to reduce the burden of mental health assess-
    ment. Psychiatr Serv. 2008;59(4):361–8.
44. Meijer RR, Nering ML. Computerized adaptive testing: over-
    view and introduction. Appl Psychol Meas. 1999;23(3):187–94.
   Chapter 14. Developing Patient-Centered Outcomes…            277

45. Revicki DA, Cella DF. Health status assessment for the twenty-­
    first century: item response theory, item banking and computer
    adaptive testing. Qual Life Res. 1997;6(6):595–600.
46. Mokkink LB, de Vet HCW, Prinsen CAC, et al. COSMIN risk
    of bias checklist for systematic reviews of patient-reported out-
    come measures. Qual Life Res. 2018;27(5):1171–9.
47. Mokkink LB, Terwee CB, Patrick DL, et al. The COSMIN check-
    list for assessing the methodological quality of studies on mea-
    surement properties of health status measurement instruments:
    an international Delphi study. Qual Life Res. 2010;19(4):539–49.
48. Reeve BB, Wyrwich KW, Wu AW, et al. ISOQOL recommends
    minimum standards for patient-reported outcome measures
    used in patient-centered outcomes and comparative effective-
    ness research. Qual Life Res. 2013;22(8):1889–905.
49. Alam R, Figueiredo SM, Balvardi S, et al. Development of a
    patient-reported outcome measure of recovery after abdominal
    surgery: a hypothesized conceptual framework. Surg Endosc.
    2018;32(12):4874–85.
50. Stark PA, Myles PS, Burke JA. Development and psychomet-
    ric evaluation of a postoperative quality of recovery score: the
    QoR-15. Anesthesiology. 2013;118(6):1332–40.
51. World Health Organization. Measuring health and disability:
    manual for WHO Disability Assessment Schedule (WHODAS
    2.0). Geneva: World Health Organization; 2012.
52. Intro to PROMIS. https://www.healthmeasures.net/explore-­
    measurement-­systems/promis/intro-­to-­promis. Accessed 17 Nov
    2020.
53. Jammer I, Wickboldt N, Sander M, et al. Standards for definitions
    and use of outcome measures for clinical effectiveness research
    in perioperative medicine: European Perioperative Clinical
    Outcome (EPCO) definitions: a statement from the ESA-­
    ESICM joint taskforce on perioperative outcome measures. Eur
    J Anaesthesiol. 2015;32(2):88–105.
54. Myles PS, Boney O, Botti M, et al. Systematic review and consen-
    sus definitions for the Standardised Endpoints in Perioperative
    Medicine (StEP) initiative: patient comfort. Br J Anaesth.
    2018;120(4):705–11.
55. Moonesinghe SR, Jackson AIR, Boney O, et al. Systematic
    review and consensus definitions for the Standardised Endpoints
    in Perioperative Medicine initiative: patient-centred outcomes.
    Br J Anaesth. 2019;123(5):664–70.
278    J. F. Fiore et al.

56. Loftus TJ, Tighe PJ, Filiberto AC, et al. Artificial intelligence and
    surgical decision-making. JAMA Surg. 2020;155(2):148–58.
57. Coons SJ, Eremenco S, Lundy JJ, O’Donohoe P, O’Gorman H,
    Malizia W. Capturing patient-reported outcome (PRO) data
    electronically: the past, present, and promise of ePRO measure-
    ment in clinical trials. Patient. 2015;8(4):301–9.
58. Ganser AL, Raymond SA, Pearson JD. Data quality and
    power in clinical trials: a comparison of ePRO and paper in a
    randomized trial. In: ePRO: electronic solutions for patient-­
    reporteddata. Surray: Gower; 2010. p. 49–78.
59. Cook KF, O’Malley KJ, Roddey TS. Dynamic assessment of
    health outcomes: time to let the CAT out of the bag? Health
    Serv Res. 2005;40(5p2):1694–711.
60. Ross J, Holzbaur E, Wade M, Rothrock T. Patient prefer-
    ences: pro mixed modes – Epro versus paper. Value Health.
    2014;17(7):A515.
61. Coons SJ, Gwaltney CJ, Hays RD, et al. Recommendations on
    evidence needed to support measurement equivalence between
    electronic and paper-based patient-reported outcome (PRO)
    measures: ISPOR ePRO good research practices task force
    report. Value Health. 2009;12(4):419–29.
62. Gwaltney CJ, Shields AL, Shiffman S. Equivalence of elec-
    tronic and paper-and-pencil administration of patient-reported
    outcome measures: a meta-analytic review. Value Health.
    2008;11(2):322–33.
63. Harniss M, Amtmann D, Cook D, Johnson K. Considerations for
    developing interfaces for collecting patient-reported outcomes
    that allow the inclusion of individuals with disabilities. Med
    Care. 2007;45(5):S48–54.
64. Wu AW, Kharrazi H, Boulware LE, Snyder CF. Measure once,
    cut twice—adding patient-reported outcome measures to the
    electronic health record for comparative effectiveness research.
    J Clin Epidemiol. 2013;66(8, Supplement):S12–20.
65. Flum DR, Alfonso-Cristancho R, Devine EB, et al.
    Implementation of a “real-world” learning health care system:
    Washington state’s comparative effectiveness research transla-
    tion network (CERTAIN). Surgery. 2014;155(5):860–6.
66. Medicine Io. Patients charting the course: citizen engagement
    and the learning health system: workshop summary. Washington,
    DC: The National Academies Press; 2011.
Chapter 15
Enhanced Recovery
Protocols: A Toolkit for
Success
Deborah S. Keller




Introduction
Undergoing surgery is analogous to running a marathon. The
marathon runner practices, preparing their body and mind to
be in their most fit state for the race. They use all methods
available to minimize exertion and optimize their perfor-
mance and endurance during the physical stress of the race.
After the race, they harness their preparation and evidence-­
based science to avoid injury and expedite recovery. No ath-
lete would go into a marathon without appropriate training,
guidance, and support. As surgeons, we should ensure our
patients train in the same fashion and receive similar guid-
ance and support for surgery. Major surgery can lead to a
variety of physiological stressors including organ dysfunction,

The author received no financial support or funding for this work.


D. S. Keller (*)
Division of Colorectal Surgery, Department of Surgery, University
of California at Davis, Sacramento, CA, USA

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature          279
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_15
280   D. S. Keller

physical trauma, and hormonal and neurological distur-
bances. Without proper preparation and education, the surgi-
cal process can lead to morbidity, delayed recovery, and even
mortality for the patient, with additional strain on the health-
care system.
   Enhanced recovery pathways (ERP) or enhanced recov-
ery after surgery (ERAS) protocols are structured periopera-
tive programs that apply evidence-based interventions
coupled with patient engagement to all stages of the surgical
process. Enhanced recovery represents a paradigm shift in
surgical practice that aims to help patients prepare and
recover better and faster than traditional methods. The proto-
cols reexamine traditional perioperative care tenets and
replace them with current best practices, when appropriate.
In turn, postoperative complications and costs are minimized
while improving postoperative recovery and patient out-
comes after major surgery.
   From personal experience, the success of an ERP is based
on four key factors:

• The local applicability of the evidence-based measures
  applied
• The development of a coordinated multidisciplinary team
  that can offer patient support along the entire care
  continuum
• The effective implementation of the program
• The participation of the patient who becomes critical in
  their own preparation and recovery

   As a rule, surgeons are risk-adverse, so implementing
change is never a simple task. But presenting the proposed
ERP changes as evidence, not just clinical suggestions, in con-
junction with a structured framework, can help with accep-
tance and change management experience. In this chapter, I
summarize the history and clinical application of enhanced
recovery and highlight the key elements in successfully
implementing an ERP into practice in surgery. The imple-
mentation here is presented like a “toolkit” and aligned with
the SAGES Master’s Program framework. The SAGES
  Chapter 15. Enhanced Recovery Protocols: A Toolkit...     281

Master’s Program framework categorizes learning into the
three levels of targeted performance: Competency, Proficiency,
and Mastery [1]. Competency is defined as what a graduating
general surgery chief resident or minimally invasive surgery
(MIS) fellow should be able to achieve; in ERP, this is likened
to performing the institutional assessment for specific quality
improvement targets and defining the multidisciplinary team
and protocol that the hospital would like to implement.
Proficiency is what a surgeon approximately 3 years out from
training should be able to accomplish; from the ERP perspec-
tive, this is compatible with developing an action plan for
implementing the intervention and a plan for evaluating
implementation and devising a program to audit perfor-
mance and compliance. Mastery is what more experienced
surgeons should be able to accomplish after 7 or more years
in practice. Mastery is applicable to SAGES surgeons seeking
in-depth knowledge in areas of controversy, best practices,
and the ability to mentor colleagues. For ERP, this could be
developing clinical practice guidelines, implementation mod-
els for other surgery service lines, or introducing new technol-
ogy or progressive topics into study, like same-day discharge
and opioid-free surgery (Table 15.1).


Understanding Enhanced Recovery Protocols
Enhanced recovery pathways or protocols (ERP) – also
known as enhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS) pro-
grams – are evidenced-based pathways designed to standard-
ize surgical care, improve outcomes, and lower healthcare
costs. ERPs were first introduced by Danish surgeon Henrik
Kehlet in the 1980s. Kehlet studied the impact of the surgical
stress response on the recovery process and combined anes-
thetic, surgical, and postoperative approaches to modify the
stress response after surgery [2]. This work developed into
multimodal fast-track pathways, which reduced the physio-
logical stress and postoperative organ dysfunction from sur-
gery by optimizing perioperative care and postoperative
rehabilitation [3–6].
282   D. S. Keller

Table 15.1 SAGES Master’s Program levels of targeted perfor-
mance in enhanced recovery
Competency            Proficiency           Mastery
What a graduating     What a surgeon        What more
general surgery       approximately 3 years experienced
chief resident or     out from training     surgeons should
MIS fellow should     should be able to     be able to
be able to achieve    accomplish            accomplish after
                                            7 or more years in
                                            practice
Institutional         The second process     Developing
assessment            is to define an        practice
Change                action plan for        guidelines
management            implementing the       Headlining
Define the program/   intervention and a     controversial
intervention/         plan for evaluating    topics, such as
initiative that the   implementation         opioid-free pain
hospital would like   Implementation         management,
to implement and      science                same-day
devise a plan for     Ensuring compliance    surgery/23-h
evaluating it                                discharge
Understanding the                            Best practices
patient has a key                            for audit
role                                         methodology
                                             Applying new
                                             technology
                                             to improve
                                             outcomes
                                             Using mHealth
                                             options for
                                             post-discharge
                                             surveillance
                                             Clinical trials
                                             to advance
                                             the science
                                             of enhanced
                                             recovery
  Chapter 15. Enhanced Recovery Protocols: A Toolkit...      283

    The specific components of ERP were assembled after
rigorous study of mechanisms of how metabolic injury and
physical interventions affected recovery, as well as the scien-
tific evaluation of the effectiveness of each measure to
enhance the recovery process. Processes for systemic inflam-
matory and catabolic response of various organ systems to
surgery, deranged fluid homeostasis and vascular responsive-
ness, anemia, and pain pathology were targets for specific
interventions [3]. These interventions formed the initial foun-
dation of ERP: standardized preoperative information, reduc-
tion of surgical stress responses, optimized dynamic pain
relief, and early mobilization and oral nutrition [7]. With the
evolution of ERP, traditional perioperative care dogmas such
as immobilization, routine drains and nasogastric tubes, and
fasting until return of bowel function were eliminated in
favor of evidence-based tenets such as normoglycemia and
elimination of fasting, carbohydrate loading before surgery,
regional anesthetic techniques, maintenance of normother-
mia and fluid balance during surgery, optimal treatment of
postoperative pain, and prophylaxis. These recommendations
were broken into interventions for all stages of care in the
surgical process – preoperative, intraoperative, postoperative,
and post-discharge periods – and published as evidence-­
based guidelines [8, 9]. These original key principles remain
but have evolved to have a greater focus on expanding the
use of prehabilitation, minimal invasive surgical techniques,
and opioid-sparing pain control [10–16].
    The concept of ERP was a paradigm shift from traditional
surgical care and recovery. However, this shift provided a
major enhancement in surgical care and recovery. ERPs were
first initiated in colorectal surgery, and the most robust data
remains in these procedures. However, their evidence-based
benefits have been proven across nearly all surgery service
lines, and guidelines currently exist for management in bar-
iatrics, breast, cytoreductive, cardiac, gastrointestinal, hepato-
pancreatic biliary, obstetric, orthopedic, pulmonary, thoracic,
neonatal intestinal, gynecologic/oncology, and urologic sur-
gery (https://erassociety.org/guidelines/list-­of-­guidelines/).
284   D. S. Keller

There are multiple controlled trials, systematic reviews and
meta-analyses, and cohort studies demonstrating consistently
reduced hospital length of stay, postoperative morbidity, and
convalescence without increasing readmission rates after sur-
gery [9, 17–33]. The same principles have been proven safe
and feasible in special patient populations, such as older
adults, Crohn’s disease, and stoma patients [27, 34–42]. With
the propagation of ERP and earlier hospital discharge, there
were concerns of a rebound increase in readmission rates. The
initial works showed no significant increases or changes in
readmission rates. As ERP experience has matured, readmis-
sion rates have actually decreased along with length of stay
and complication rates [28, 43]. While there are ongoing stud-
ies on the impact of ERAS on patient outcomes, it appears
that essentially any surgical specialty, patient population, and
age group should be considered for an ERP.
   In addition to the clinical benefits, ERPs have consistently
improved healthcare utilization and reduced hospital costs
[23, 29, 44–53]. The cost savings results primarily from the
decrease in hospital length of stay after ERP implementation.
The total cost savings in acute hospitalizations after surgery
has been estimated as a greater than 15% cost savings per
patient [54]. Thus, ERP can help improve healthcare value in
the current environment of rising healthcare costs.
   Questions initially arose about the safety and acceptability
of this shift away from traditional length-of-stay patterns with
ERP, where patients are sent home from the hospital after
only a few days postsurgery [55, 56]. However, with proper
education, established communication lines, and ensuring all
patient care needs are met, recovery at home can actually be
optimal. Patients are familiar with the surroundings, have
access to their belongings and support system, and can con-
trol their environment, which promotes a less stressful and
less traumatic recovery. Further, in the pandemic environ-
ment where hospital visitation by family members may be
prohibited or limited, patients have unrestricted family sup-
port while recovering at home. Studies have shown patients
embraced the protocols, reporting significantly less pain, used
  Chapter 15. Enhanced Recovery Protocols: A Toolkit...     285

fewer opiates, and returned to physical activities faster than
patients managed with traditional techniques [57–59].
   There are ways to help improve individual outcomes after
implementing ERP into practice. Compliance and adherence
to the protocol elements matter. Strict adherence is associ-
ated with a reduced incidence of postoperative symptoms,
complications, and length of stay (LOS) in elective surgery
[60–64]. While adherence matters, few studies report on
actual adherence rates with their programs [65]. Furthermore,
strict adherence to all elements in a multimodal protocol can
be a challenge in all patient populations [66]. Studies have
tried to identify the relative importance of the individual ele-
ments and which are the key components to ensure compli-
ance with [60–64, 67]. However, there are large discrepancies
in the elements found to be independent predictors of suc-
cessful outcomes across all studies, including age, restriction
of intravenous fluid, use of a preoperative carbohydrate
drink, utilization of minimally invasive surgery, removal of
nasogastric tube before extubation, early mobilization, early
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug initiation, and early
removal of thoracic epidural analgesia. This is not unex-
pected, as each institution is unique in its patient and pro-
vider population, starting point, and quality needs. However,
there are categorical demographic and procedural variables
the multidisciplinary team can use to recognize which patients
will need extra attention adhering to the standardized path-
ways, including preoperative anxiety, chronic pain, preopera-
tive chemoradiation, and intraoperative conversion [68].


I mplementing an Enhanced Recovery
 Pathway into Practice
While the concept and evidence supporting ERP is well
established, few medical centers have been able to embed
them seamlessly in their culture. Even among SAGES sur-
geons, a 2016 survey found less than half regularly used some
elements of ERPs (48.7%) and 30% were unfamiliar with the
286    D. S. Keller

concept [69]. To many in the surgical world, ERP principles
remain foreign or unimplemented, to the patients’ detriment
[70]. Among those reporting ERP use, there was wide variety
in the specific elements and discharge used, with a universal
need for information on implementation, compliance, and
measuring outcomes. With the established benefits, develop-
ing a framework for a successful ERP is key to improving a
surgical department’s quality and outcomes. Here, we describe
the steps aligned with the SAGES Master’s Program levels of
targeted performance: Competency, Proficiency, and Mastery.


Competency

Goals

•   Defining the multidisciplinary team and assigning roles
•   Literature and evidence review
•   Gap analysis and benchmarking
•   Institutional assessment for quality improvement targets
•   Developing the multimodal protocol

    The first step to competency is to assemble a multidisci-
plinary team and define leaders. There needs to be one over-
all leader, tasked with coordinating the meetings and ongoing
comprehensive details related to the ERP. Under the overall
leader are “champions” of enhanced recovery in your organi-
zation. They should become subject matter experts in the
science of ERP, help change the culture during implementa-
tion, and oversee ongoing refinements in the process. It is
suggested that the champions be well-known and respected
individuals that are mid-career, not too “junior” such that
their voice is unknown, yet not too “senior” that their clinical
demands are too much to devote the necessary time for this
interactive role. For instance, Division Chiefs rather than
Department Chairs would be a good appointment. The team
should include a representation of every group the patient
could interact with during their hospital stay and recovery
  Chapter 15. Enhanced Recovery Protocols: A Toolkit...      287

process. It should be diverse in discipline, including allied
health and support services, and experience level, with house
staff and attendings all represented. A true multidisciplinary
team can help serve as a check and balance system for patient
safety and help the implementation of the protocol, by having
members that enter, process, approve, and deliver elements of
the ERP. It is important to remember that every member of
the team has a unique, equal, and important voice in the pro-
cess. A strong multidisciplinary team with good lines of com-
munication can also help ensure patient engagement and
education on the ERP. Suggestions for a multidisciplinary
team include administrative officers in patient safety, finance,
and quality improvement roles; surgery; nursing (from inpa-
tient, outpatient, and perioperative areas); anesthesia; phar-
macy; nutrition; physical therapy; case management; social
work; wound ostomy care nurses; data analysts; and unit
managers of common postoperative care wards.
    In the current landscape, many organizations, departments,
and even individual providers have attempted to introduce
an ERP or elements of an ERP into practice. When created
and implemented without the top-down support and central-
ization under a primary leader, it is not possible to standard-
ize communications and order sets, rollout the program in an
efficient fashion, or use common metrics and time frames for
auditing. The program will be carried out in silos, with
­redundancy and variation across all steps. By definition, this
 framework will fail to meet the overall goals of a standard-
 ized, cost-efficient, and effective ERP. While a major culture
 change (that could potentially impact the egos of engaged
 providers), the best thing for the organization as a whole in
 this situation is to start from scratch. Place a fresh leader in
 charge over the champions, ensuring higher-level support.
 Then, include those who previously led stand-alone programs
 as champions in the multidisciplinary team, respecting their
 experience and input (Fig. 15.1).
    Following establishment of the team, the next step to
becoming competent in enhanced recovery is to do your
homework – perform a literature search from a search engine
288         D. S. Keller

                                                              Quality and Safety
 a                                                           Executive Committee



                                                                    Leader



                                                                             Clinical Coordinator



                                                                                     Analyst



 Champion(s) from all               Champion(s) from          Representatives from             Resident     Representatives from all Allied
 Surgical Service Lines               Anesthesia                all Nursing Units              Champion     Health and Support Services



 b
                                            Quality and Safety                  Quality and Safety                   Quality and Safety
  Bariatric Surgery                                                                Committee
                                               Committee                                                                Committee


  ERAS Committee                           ERAS Committee for
     Leader                                                                     Colorectal QI Program                  SSI Workgroup
                                         Colorectal and Acute Care


         ERAS                                                                                Clinical
                                                 Nurse Abstractors                         Coordinator                      Chair
       Committee


             Clinical Coordinator                                                                                             Project Manager
                                                        Analyst                                Analyst



                                                 Reps from select                         Reps from all                         Clinical Lead
                   Analyst
                                                 Allied Health and                      Allied Health and
                                                 Support Services                       Support Services

             Reps from select                                                                                                       Analyst
             Allied Health and                          Rep from                          Reps from all
             Support Services                          Anesthesia                         Nursing Units

                                                                                                                               Surgery Service
               Reps from                                                                         Resident                      Line Champions
           Select Nursing Units                                                                  Champion

                                                                                                                              Reps from some
                                                                                                                              Allied Health and
    Information technology (Epic Order sets) and Anesthesia                                                                   Support Services




Figure 15.1 Enhanced recovery pathway structure in ideal (a) and
noneffective (b) models

such as PubMed® of “enhanced recovery,” “enhanced recov-
ery after surgery,” “prehabilitation,” and your specific surgery
discipline, such as “colorectal surgery” or “bariatric surgery.”
This will allow you to review the publications on subject mat-
ter, from recent clinical trials to classic foundation studies.
Reviewing the literature can also help you learn about tools,
techniques, and methodology that have been helpful to
patients and providers that have already gone through this
process. After a broad initial review, your initial search can be
refined by adding in process measures (e.g., risk assessment,
nutrition, cardiovascular exercise, minimally invasive surgery,
early ambulation) and outcome measures (e.g., length of stay,
complication rates, readmission rates, costs, patient discharge
  Chapter 15. Enhanced Recovery Protocols: A Toolkit...     289

destination) for work more specific to your institution’s inter-
ests. Following this literature search, reviewing guidelines and
existing protocols for enhanced recovery protocols in your
surgery service will help establish a strong understanding of
the process, outcomes, and elements in existing protocols, as
well as the evidence behind selecting them. Valuable sites for
this information are surgical society pages, the ERAS Society,
Cochrane Database, and surgical department websites that
employ known subject matter leaders. From your review of
the literature and evidence, present a sample of key pieces to
the administration and multidisciplinary team. These are
basics of financial benefits and clinical outcomes, to give the
group a sense of urgency and need to implement a protocol.
An example of these key papers for colorectal surgery is seen
in Table 15.2.
    With the team in place, the next step for competency is for
the team to perform an assessment of the quality improve-
ment needs at your institution. This information can be
derived from a variety of sources, including your institution’s
divisional morbidity and mortality reports; administrative
billing data, nationally validated, risk-adjusted, outcomes-­
based programs (e.g., ACS NSQIP®); and member-driven
healthcare performance analytic agencies (e.g., Vizient,
Optum). These data can identify the specific gaps or
­deficiencies you have in processes that are affecting the over-
 all quality; they can be outcome measures (result of system
 processes, such as urinary tract infection rate, length of stay,
 and readmission rates) or process measures (the specific
 steps in a process that lead to a particular outcome metric,
 such as routine removal of Foley catheters on day 1 after
 surgery and patient education sessions on surgical expecta-
 tions) [71]. While process metrics may ultimately be more
 important, outcome metrics are more visible and easier to
 audit change from. In addition, outcome metrics such as read-
 mission are targets for the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
 Services (CMS) value-based programs, which can penalize
 providers for higher-than-expected rates in an effort to
 reduce excess hospital readmissions, lower healthcare costs,
290    D. S. Keller

Table 15.2 Suggested key    literature on enhanced recovery in
colorectal surgery
King PM, Blazeby JM,        Keller DS, Bankwitz B, Woconish
Ewings P, et al. The        D et al. Predicting who will fail
influence of an enhanced    early discharge after laparoscopic
recovery programme on       colorectal surgery with an established
clinical outcomes, costs    enhanced recovery pathway. Surg
and quality of life after   Endosc. 2014;28:74–79
surgery for colorectal
cancer. Colorectal Dis.
2006;8:506–513
Kehlet H, Wilmore           Thiele, RH, Rea, KM, Turrentine, FE,
DW. Evidence-based          et al. Standardization of care: impact
surgical care and the       of an enhanced recovery protocol
evolution of fast-track     on length of stay, complications, and
surgery. Ann Surg.          direct costs after colorectal surgery.
2008;248:189–198            J Am Coll Surg. 2015;220:430–
                            43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
                            jamcollsurg.2014.12.042
Spanjersberg WR,            West, MA, Loughney, L, Lythgoe,
Reurings J, Keus F, van     D, et al. Effect of prehabilitation
Laarhoven CJ. Fast          on objectively measured physical
track surgery versus        fitness after neoadjuvant treatment in
conventional recovery       preoperative rectal cancer patients: a
strategies for colorectal   blinded interventional pilot study. Br
surgery. Cochrane           J Anaesth. 2015;114:244–51
Database Syst Rev.
2011;CD007635
Lawrence JK, Keller DS,     Carmichael, JC, Keller, DS, Baldini,
Samia H et al. Discharge    G, et al. Clinical practice guideline
within 24 to 72 hours       for enhanced recovery after colon
of colorectal surgery       and rectal surgery from the American
is associated with low      Society of Colon and Rectal
readmission rates when      Surgeons (ASCRS) and Society
using enhanced recovery     of American Gastrointestinal and
pathways. J Am Coll Surg.   Endoscopic Surgeons (SAGES). Surg
2013;216:390–394            Endosc. 2017;31:3412–3436
  Chapter 15. Enhanced Recovery Protocols: A Toolkit...          291

Table 15.2 (continued)
Smart NJ, White P,            Francis, NK, Walker, T, Carter,
Allison AS, Ockrim JB,        F, et al. Consensus on training
Kennedy RH, Francis           and implementation of enhanced
NK. Deviation and failure     recovery after surgery: a Delphi
of enhanced recovery          study. World J Surg. 2018;42:1919–
after surgery following       1928. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00268-­
laparoscopic colorectal       017-­4436-­2
surgery: Early prediction
model. Colorectal Dis.
2012;14:e727–34
Aarts MA, Okrainec            van Rooijen, S, Carli, F, Dalton, S,
A, Glicksman A,               et al. Multimodal prehabilitation in
Pearsall E, Victor JC,        colorectal cancer patients to improve
McLeod RS. Adoption           functional capacity and reduce
of enhanced recovery          postoperative complications: the first
after surgery (ERAS)          international randomized controlled
strategies for colorectal     trial for multimodal prehabilitation.
surgery at academic           BMC Cancer. 2019;19:98
teaching hospitals and
impact on total length of
hospital stay. Surg Endosc.
2012;26:442–450
Lee L, Li C, Landry T
et al. A systematic review
of economic evaluations
of enhanced recovery
pathways for colorectal
surgery. Ann Surg.
2014;259:670–676.


and improve patient safety and outcomes [72]. The team can
compare their internal state with other internal departments,
other hospitals, and federal benchmarking levels for each
metric. From this benchmarking, they can determine which
areas have performance gaps compared to published stan-
dards. Selecting one or two measures as the initial focus of the
ERP can help keep all parties focused and engaged during
292    D. S. Keller

the implementation process. It may also make parties resis-
tant to change more likely to “buy in” to the protocol.
Common outcome measures selected are readmissions, length
of stay, catheter-­associated urinary tract infections, and surgi-
cal site infections, as these are linked to financial penalties.
While not all members of the department may be open to
introducing a new ERP and changing their current practice,
they need to be open to reducing readmissions, length of stay,
catheter-­associated urinary tract infections, and surgical site
infections. Thus, introducing the ERP as a way to help the
bottom line and improve outcomes instead of a process
change may help acceptance with colleagues.
   The final step in competency is developing the institution’s
multimodal protocol with the multidisciplinary team. ERP
elements are fairly uniform. The availability of specific medi-
cations or services may differ across institution, though.
Surgery departmental websites with known ERAS programs
are an excellent source to reference ERP models. A sample
of our department’s ERP for colorectal surgery is seen in
Fig. 15.2. The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
(AHRQ) Safety Program for Improving Surgical Care and
Recovery (ISCR), a collaborative program with the American
College of Surgeons (ACS) and Johns Hopkins Medicine
Armstrong Institute for Patient Safety and Quality, also
offers a wealth of templates, if needed. The steps of compe-
tency are summarized in Fig. 15.3.


Proficiency

Goals

•   Education in all patient-facing divisions
•   Developing a plan for implementation
•   Implementation
•   Constructing a plan for evaluating the implementation
•   Creating a plan for audit and ensuring ongoing
    compliance
   Chapter 15. Enhanced Recovery Protocols: A Toolkit...                                                293

   The proficiency stage is an in-depth planning phase. The
specific goals and processes have already been defined. The
next step is to define how to put them in place. This is specific
for each institution and must take into account local factors.
From a broad perspective, the proficiency step is most suc-
cessful by planning education sessions with all patient-facing

 Pre-operative
 4-6 Weeks before
 Screen                        Anemia, cognition, diabetes, falls, frailty, function
 Multimodal prehabilitaton
 Referral                      Primary provider, specialist, or anesthesia clinic, as needed
 Optimize                      Polypharmacy, stop supplements, smoking, and alcohol
 Day before
 Oral and mechanical           1g Neomycin, 500mg metronidazole at 2, 3, and 9pm
 bowel prep                    Miralax/gatorade at 2pm
 Diet                          Clear liquids until 4 hours before schedule surgery time (G2/ Water/
                               smart water/ pedialyte)
 Skin cleansing                Shower with antibacterial soap (dial or chlorhexidine liquid)
 Immunonutrition               Ensure drink 2× daily (6 days prior to surgery)
 Pre-emptive analgesia         Gabapentin 600mg PO at 6pm
 Day of surgery
 Carb loading (at home)        – Clear liquids (G2/ water/ smart water/pedialyte) until 4 hours
                                   before hospital arrival; If arrival at or before 9:00 am, then NPO
                                   from midnight
                               – Ensure/ impact 2 hrs before scheduled start time
 Ileus prophylaxis             Alvimopan 12mg PO (1 pre-op dose in all cases)
 (preop unit)
 Pre-emptive analgesia         Celecoxib 200mg, Tylenol 975mg PO
 (preop unit)
 Stoma patients                Notify NP if stoma trial patient
 (preop unit)
 Intraoperative
 Pre-emptive analgesia         TAP block (notify regional anesthesia team and consent)
                               – If using regular local, administer at end of case
                               – If using EXPAREL, administer at start of case
 Antibiotics-within 60 mins    Ceftriaxone 1 or 2g and 500mg metronidazole
 of incision
                               If documented PCN allergy, per institution’s nomogram
 DVT prophylaxis               SubQ Heparin 5,000u
                               SCD’s
 Foley                         Insert Foley sterile in OR
 PONV prophylaxis              Dexamethasone 8mg at induction
                               Zofran 4mg at reversal
 Skin prep                     Clipping hair
                               Chlorhexidine–3 min airdry
 Maintain normothermia         Warm air device, fluid warmer, room temp
 Maintain euglycemia           Tight glycemic control 80–120
 Goal directed fluid therapy   Use crystalloid, avoid salt/water overload / 1.5–2ml/kg/hrs
 Wound protectors              Extraction site and laparotomy incisions
 Clean closure                 Entire team changes gloves and gowns for skin closure
                               Clean closure tray opened and used
 Multimodal pain               Anesthesia to use opioids only as needed after induction
 management
                               Toradol 30mg at closure (no Toradol in Crohn’s disease)


Figure 15.2 Sample of an enhanced recovery pathway in colorectal
surgery
294       D. S. Keller

Postoperative (identify patient as Eras)
POD #0
Fluids                        Crystalloid @ 1cc/kg/ideal body weight/hr for 6hrs, then 40cc/hr
Diet                          Transitional diet POD 0
                              Alvimopan 12mg BID while inpatient (7d max) ONLY if open case
PONV                          (STOP in MIS case)
Analgesia                     Gabapentin 300mg PO q8hrs or 300mg PO QHS if >70yrs
                              Toradol 15mg IV q6hrs (Hold in Crohn’s disease patients)
                              Acetaminophen 975mg PO q8hrs
PRN and pain adjuncts         – Oxycodone 5mg PO q6hrs prn pain 4–6/10 (moderate)
                              – Oxycodone 10mg PO q6hrs prn pain 7–10/10 (severe)
                              – Dilaudid 0.5mg IV q3 hrs prn pain 8–10/10 (“breakthrough”)
                              – Selective if persistent pain/ pre-existing opioids:
                              – Add Lidocaine patch to the abdomen
                              – Add Roboxin 750mg PO QID for muscle spasm
                              – PCA-Fentanyl–25-50mcg Q10 min (and stop all other prn meds)
Activity                      To chair 3–6 hrs post op, ambulate q6 hrs (goal 2000 steps)
POD #1 onward
Fluids                        DC IVF
Diet                          Transitional diet
                              Ensure supplement (or diabetic glucerna) at least once per day
POI prophylaxis               Alvimopan 12mg PO BID (open cases)
DVT prophylaxis               40mg Lovenox SC daily
Analgesia                     Gabapentin 300mg PO Q8hrs or 300mg PO QHS if >70yrs
                              Celecoxib 200mg PO BID if CrCl >30 mL/min
                               – Celecoxib 100mg PO BID if older than 70yrs
                               – If renal failure or Crohn’s disease, no NSAIDS-> Use prn
                               – medications
                               – If recent MI or stents, no Celecoxib; use Toradol 30mg IV q6hrs
                              Acetaminophen 975mg PO q8hrs
PRN and pain adjuncts          – Oxycodone 5mg PO q6hrs prn pain 4–6/10 (moderate)
                               – Oxycodone 10mg PO q6hrs prn pain 7–10/10 (severe)
                               – Dilaudid 0.5mg IV q3 hrs prn pain 8–10/10 (“breakthrough”)
PONV prophylaxis              Prn: Zofran 4mg IV q6hrs or Reglan 10mg IV q6hrs
Activity                      Out of bed for all meals and at least 6 hours daily
                              Ambulate 4× daily; increase distance each day (goal 2000-4000 steps)
                              DC Foley if not removed in OR
Other                         (Day 2 for low pelvic cases and pouches)
                              Head of bed elevated to 30 degrees at all times
Ancillary services            Enterostomal therapy teaching for all ileostomy and colostomy patients
                              Physical therapy as needed for disposition
                              Nutrition therapy
DC planning                   Follow -up appointment scheduled
                               – Option for PCP for staple removal, Telehealth visit
                              Early notification for home care needs to social work/ case management
                              Lovenox for DVT prophylaxis X 28 days post discharge for all
                              colorectal cancer and IBD resection cases (not stoma creations, stoma
                              closures)
                              Train patient/caregiver to perform injection, start POD 1 (nursing order)


Figure 15.2 (continued)
   Chapter 15. Enhanced Recovery Protocols: A Toolkit...                                        295

Discharge planning
Defined discharge criteria:   Walking?
                              Passing flatus/ stoma function?
                              Pain controlled with PO meds?
                              Tolerating PO diet?
                              Ready to go home?
                              Follow -up appointment scheduled prior to discharge?
Discharge prescriptions:      Gabapentin 300mg PO q8hrs × 2 weeks
                              Tylenol 650mg and Motrin/ Advil/ Ibuprofen 600mg PO q8hrs × 2
                              weeks
                              Bowel regimen: Colace and Miralax
                              Tramadol 100mg q8hrs prn severe pain × 6–12 tabs prn (depending on
                              medication use in the hospital prior to discharge and case complexity)
                              6-stoma closure;
                              10-colectomy, anorectal;
                              12-proctectomy, pouch, APR
                              Lovenox as above


Figure 15.2 (continued)

Create the Multidisciplinary      Pathway & Evidence             Develop Pathways for Each
  Team and Assign Roles                Review                     Phase of Surgical Process

                                  Gap Analysis & Goal
                                       Setting

                                Review Data for Quality
                                 Improvement Targets




Fig. 15.3 Competency level steps

groups. These should include the preoperative nurses, postan-
esthesia care unit nurses, floor nurses, surgical residents, case
management, anesthesia residents/certified registered nurse
anesthetists, and your administrative support staff. In these
sessions, you should communicate the background, protocol,
and particular roles that group will play. It should be noted
that these standardized processes are aimed to make their
work easier, not create more work by changing what they are
used to doing. Seek their input and be open to changes based
on their experience. Ask for ongoing feedback so these
groups are clear you’re partners in this quality improvement
goal. Having written communication is also important. Ensure
296     D. S. Keller

there are patient and provider education booklets or hand-
outs created detailing the ERP elements for the surgery lines
and changes from usual practice with their rationale. Advertise
the program on the department website and social media
platforms and offer to give grand rounds to partnering
departments.
   After educating all groups, develop an implementation
plan to roll out your ERP. Implementation is a set of activi-
ties designed to put the program into practice. It requires a
coordinated change at the organizational and practice levels;
thus, implementation is not easy. It should be thought of as an
ongoing process, not a single event on the “rollout day.”
Having a timeline of the process mapped over a year is advis-
able (Fig. 15.4). This should be reviewed at all committee
meetings. Committee meetings should also be scheduled
regularly, such as monthly, with clear roles and action steps
for all participating members. The skills of emotional intelli-
gence, leadership, team dynamics, culture, buy-in, motivation,
and sustainability are central to a successful ERP
­implementation and should be demonstrated by the leader
 and team members. The first step of implementation is the
 baseline. Baseline occurs before actually trying to put the
 ERP into practice and serves as a final inventory check phase
 before the formal implementation. Here, ensure all order sets,
 checklists, templates, and common phrases have been created
 by your institutions’ information technology (IT) partners
 and are live in the electronic medical record (EMR) system.
 Confirm all parties communicating with patients or putting in


      Months       Months               Months                Months            Months
       1-3          4-5                  6-7                   8-9              10-12

                                                                          SUSTAINABILITY
  BASELINE
                                IMPLEMENTATION                            Ongoing evaluation
  Planning and   Putting the protocol into action, with data collection     of the evidence,
  organization                and audit of the outcomes                     outcomes, and
                                                                          protocol refinement



Figure 15.4 Timeline for implementation of an enhanced recovery
pathway
  Chapter 15. Enhanced Recovery Protocols: A Toolkit...       297

orders are aware and educated about the ERP. Have a data
collection and audit plan in place, as well as an analyst in
charge of generating reports for the committee and support-
ing executives. There are many options for how to accomplish
these processes, including developing them manually at the
institutional level with variables pulled from the patient
records, creating automated reports from your electronic
medical record system (NSQIP), or participating claims data-
base or even the ERAS® Interactive Audit System (Encare).
Common elements for data collection include patient demo-
graphics (e.g., age, physical status, body mass index, gender,
frailty, independence level, comorbidities), patient outcome
measures (e.g., hospital length of stay, readmissions, reopera-
tion, complications/morbidity, and mortality), benefits and
costs per patient in the pathway, patient compliance with the
elements (overall and individual ERP elements, as percent-
age or number of elements chosen), and provider compliance
with pathway elements within their specialty (overall and
individual ERP elements, as percentage or number of ele-
ments chosen). A simple institutional-level report is seen in
Fig. 15.5. The audit should provide high-level and detailed
documentation, monitoring, and evaluation of variances and
outcomes. The audit should be performed regularly, such as
monthly at initiation, and then quarterly after well estab-
lished. Reports should be reviewed by the multidisciplinary
committee regularly. Over time, it can determine barriers/
obstacles to success and help the committee develop action
plans to address. Tools such as six sigma and statistical ­process
control can be applied to evaluate changes over time and
reductions in outliers with the ERP [73–82].
   The final step in the implementation plan is sustainability.
This is an ongoing process where the team can use informa-
tion from the audit to identify issues in the process or struc-
ture of care that impact compliance with the ERP and make
necessary changes. Barriers to success can be identified, and
facilitators to success put into place. Staffing and organiza-
tional barriers include resistance or difficulty adapting to
change, consultants or locums, patient coverage, disagree-
298      D. S. Keller

            Item and phase           Surgeon   Surgeon   Surgeon   Surgeon   Total
                                        1         2         3         4
 Preop counseling
 Screen anemia, DM, Frailty,
 malnutrition
 Prehab 4–6 weeks
 Immunonutriton × 5 days
 Volume loading
 Oral/mechanical bowel prep
 Preop pain management
 Anitbiotic prophylaxis
 DVT prophylaxis
 Tap block
 Minimally invasive approach
 Goal directed fluid
 No abdominal or pelvic drainage
 Intraop opioid sparing regimen
 No routine ng tube
 Post OP iv fluid restriction
 <100ml/hr
 Limited PACU stay <240
 PONV prophylaxis
 Early diet
 Early ambulation
 Early foley D/C
 Scheduled
 NSAID/gabapentin/tylenol
 Scheduled (open) or stopped (MIS)
 ENTEREG
 Avoidance of pca
 Early d/c post op iv fluids
 Opioid free stay
 Mean los
 Number of total patients
 Compliance rate
 Complaince compared to last
 month


Figure 15.5 Monthly surgeon scorecard compliance report sample

ment with the protocol recommendations, scheduling, and
lack of resources to implement the protocol elements.
Facilitators included education on the patient and provider
benefits and also good communication, strong leadership
support, integration of enhanced recovery protocol order sets
and computer order entry systems to ease the workload, and
feedback of the audit data, and including all staff in celebrat-
ing program “wins”. Patient-related barriers include charac-
teristics of the population (e.g., high comorbidities, frailness,
emergency cases, poor social support, poor health literacy)
and concerns about care following discharge. Facilitators
  Chapter 15. Enhanced Recovery Protocols: A Toolkit...                    299

include patient engagement and education, early communi-
cation, and patient feedback of compliance with ERP ele-
ments. It is important to have ongoing committee meetings
and continue to address barriers faced. The care process is not
static; new procedures, instruments, medications, and evi-
dence are constantly introduced. With this, it is imperative to
continually update your ERP and communications with new
evidence to ensure the best outcomes are sustained. The ele-
ments of proficiency are seen in Fig. 15.6.


Mastery

Goals

• Develop alternative pathways for high-risk patients and
  procedures.
• Trial and implement new tools to improve compliance.
• Research and clinical trials.

   After successfully implementing an ERP with ongoing
audit and reassessment, you will essentially enter Mastery
level. At this point, an audit will be able to highlight the outli-
ers in a well-implemented protocol. Drilling down on these
points may demonstrate specific high-risk patient popula-
tions, such as elderly patients, patients on chronic opioid
medications, and ileostomy creation or closure cases. Elements


   Education and         Implementation–putting        Ongoing audit and
Communication with all    the protocol into action reassessment of the protocol
    Stakeholders                                         and outcomes




Figure 15.6 Proficiency level steps
300   D. S. Keller

in your standardized protocol may be failing to help these
patients. There is an opportunity to investigate the outcome
variables, and adjust one of more elements in the ERP, as
appropriate for that population. Following up the outcomes
after tailoring the protocol elements to the specific patient
needs can help elevate your enhanced recovery practices for
success in all patients.
    Using tools, such as wearable devices or mobile health
apps, can also help further ERP benefits. Wearable sensors
are designed to monitor cardiorespiratory function, which
may help early discharge processes, as well as early detec-
tion of clinical deterioration after discharge [83]. Activity
trackers can be used to monitor ambulation, a major ele-
ment of ERPs directly associated with early recovery [84,
85]. Finally, mobile apps with education and electronic
checklists can help ensure compliance with ERP elements
and patient engagement, even after discharge [86–88]. It is
beneficial to have accomplished the Mastery level before
adding health technologies to an ERP to ensure appropriate
patient education, communication, and easy implementa-
tion of the additional tool.
    Having a well-established ERP also makes evaluating the
impact of an individual component in the protocol feasible.
At the Mastery level, the committee can look at the benefits
of opioid reduction, the impact of adding or removing a spe-
cific medication, and cost analyses, among other topics [76,
89–92]. Formal clinical or randomized controlled trials are
also possible to increase the evidence base of ERP elements.
With Institutional Review Board approval of your ERP, these
studies can be published to help guide others looking to
improve surgical outcomes. The elements of Mastery are seen
in Fig. 15.7.
  Chapter 15. Enhanced Recovery Protocols: A Toolkit...                  301

  Develop alternative     New tools to improve   Research and Clinical trials
pathways for high-risk       compliance
patients and procedures



                                                          VS.
                                                         ???
                                                         ?

Figure 15.7 Mastery level steps


Conclusion
Enhanced recovery pathways are a proven method to improve
patient outcomes after surgery. While the benefits are well
known, the process of putting an ERP into practice can be
daunting. Here, the end-to-end process is presented like a
“toolkit” and aligned with the SAGES Master’s Program
levels of Competency, Proficiency, and Mastery. Details on
the activities in each level and checklists documenting com-
pletion can help successfully guide users through the enhanced
recovery process.


References
 1. Jones DB, Stefanidis D, Korndorffer JR, et al. SAGES University
    MASTERS program: a structured curriculum for deliberate, life-
    long learning. Surg Endosc. 2017;31:3061–71.
 2. Kehlet H. The stress response to surgery: release mechanisms
    and the modifying effect of pain relief. Acta Chir Scand Suppl.
    1989;550:22–8.
 3. Kehlet H. Multimodal approach to control postoperative patho-
    physiology and rehabilitation. Br J Anaesth. 1997;78:606–17.
 4. Kehlet H, Wilmore DW. Multimodal strategies to improve surgi-
    cal outcome. Am J Surg. 2002;183:630–41.
 5. Kehlet H, Wilmore DW. Evidence-based surgical care and the
    evolution of fast-track surgery. Ann Surg. 2008;248:189–98.
 6. Kehlet H. Fast-track colorectal surgery. Lancet. 2008;371:791–3.
302    D. S. Keller

 7. Kehlet H. Fast-track colonic surgery: status and perspectives.
    Recent Results Cancer Res. 2005;165:8–13.
 8. Gustafsson UO, Scott MJ, Hubner M, et al. Guidelines for
    perioperative care in elective colorectal surgery: Enhanced
    Recovery After Surgery (ERAS®) Society recommendations:
    2018. World J Surg. 2019;43:659–95.
 9. Carmichael JC, Keller DS, Baldini G, et al. Clinical practice
    guidelines for enhanced recovery after colon and rectal surgery
    from the American Society of Colon and Rectal Surgeons and
    Society of American Gastrointestinal and Endoscopic Surgeons.
    Dis Colon Rectum. 2017;60:761–84.
10. Carli F, Zavorsky GS. Optimizing functional exercise capacity
    in the elderly surgical population. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab
    Care. 2005;8:23–32.
11. Merki-Künzli C, Kerstan-Huber M, Switalla D, et al. Assessing
    the value of prehabilitation in patients undergoing colorec-
    tal surgery according to the enhanced recovery after surgery
    (ERAS) pathway for the improvement of postoperative out-
    comes: protocol for a randomized controlled trial. JMIR Res
    Protoc. 2017;6:e199.
12. King AB, Spann MD, Jablonski P, Wanderer JP, Sandberg
    WS, McEvoy MD. An enhanced recovery program for bariat-
    ric surgical patients significantly reduces perioperative opioid
    consumption and postoperative nausea. Surg Obes Relat Dis.
    2018;14:849–56.
13. Pache B, Hübner M, Jurt J, Demartines N, Grass F. Minimally
    invasive surgery and enhanced recovery after surgery: the ideal
    combination. J Surg Oncol. 2017;116:613–6.
14. Spanjersberg WR, van Sambeeck JD, Bremers A, Rosman C, van
    Laarhoven CJ. Systematic review and meta-analysis for lapa-
    roscopic versus open colon surgery with or without an ERAS
    programme. Surg Endosc. 2015;29:3443–53.
15. Brandal D, Keller MS, Lee C, et al. Impact of enhanced recovery
    after surgery and opioid-free anesthesia on opioid prescriptions
    at discharge from the hospital: a historical-prospective study.
    Anesth Analg. 2017;125:1784–92.
16. Vlug MS, Wind J, Hollmann MW, et al. Laparoscopy in com-
    bination with fast track multimodal management is the best
    perioperative strategy in patients undergoing colonic sur-
    gery: a randomized clinical trial (LAFA-study). Ann Surg.
    2011;254:868–75.
  Chapter 15. Enhanced Recovery Protocols: A Toolkit...          303

17. Greco M, Capretti G, Beretta L, Gemma M, Pecorelli N,
    Braga M. Enhanced recovery program in colorectal surgery:
    a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. World J Surg.
    2014;38:1531–41.
18. Miller TE, Thacker JK, White WD, et al. Reduced length of
    hospital stay in colorectal surgery after implementation of an
    enhanced recovery protocol. Anesth Analg. 2014;118:1052–61.
19. ERAS CG. The impact of enhanced recovery protocol compli-
    ance on elective colorectal cancer resection: results from an
    international registry. Ann Surg. 2015;261:1153–9.
20. Berian JR, Ban KA, Liu JB, et al. Association of an enhanced
    recovery pilot with length of stay in the National Surgical
    Quality Improvement Program. JAMA Surg. 2018;153:358–65.
21. Delaney CP, Brady K, Woconish D, Parmar SP, Champagne
    BJ. Towards optimizing perioperative colorectal care: outcomes
    for 1,000 consecutive laparoscopic colon procedures using
    enhanced recovery pathways. Am J Surg. 2012;203:353–5; discus-
    sion 355.
22. Eskicioglu C, Forbes SS, Aarts MA, Okrainec A, McLeod
    RS. Enhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS) programs for
    patients having colorectal surgery: a meta-analysis of random-
    ized trials. J Gastrointest Surg. 2009;13:2321–9.
23. King PM, Blazeby JM, Ewings P, et al. The influence of an
    enhanced recovery programme on clinical outcomes, costs and
    quality of life after surgery for colorectal cancer. Color Dis.
    2006;8:506–13.
24. Larson DW, Lovely JK, Cima RR, et al. Outcomes after imple-
    mentation of a multimodal standard care pathway for laparo-
    scopic colorectal surgery. Br J Surg. 2014;101:1023–30.
25. Lau CS, Chamberlain RS. Enhanced recovery after surgery pro-
    grams improve patient outcomes and recovery: a meta-analysis.
    World J Surg. 2017;41:899–913.
26. Lawrence JK, Keller DS, Samia H, et al. Discharge within 24 to
    72 hours of colorectal surgery is associated with low readmission
    rates when using enhanced recovery pathways. J Am Coll Surg.
    2013;216:390–4.
27. Pawa N, Cathcart PL, Arulampalam TH, Tutton MG, Motson
    RW. Enhanced recovery program following colorectal resection
    in the elderly patient. World J Surg. 2012;36:415–23.
28. Shah PM, Johnston L, Sarosiek B, et al. Reducing readmis-
    sions while shortening length of stay: the positive impact of an
304      D. S. Keller

      enhanced recovery protocol in colorectal surgery. Dis Colon
      Rectum. 2017;60:219–27.
29.   Thiele RH, Rea KM, Turrentine FE, et al. Standardization of
      care: impact of an enhanced recovery protocol on length of stay,
      complications, and direct costs after colorectal surgery. J Am
      Coll Surg. 2015;220:430–43.
30.   Wind J, Polle SW, Fung Kon Jin PH, et al. Systematic review of
      enhanced recovery programmes in colonic surgery. Br J Surg.
      2006;93:800–9.
31.   Zhuang CL, Ye XZ, Zhang XD, Chen BC, Yu Z. Enhanced
      recovery after surgery programs versus traditional care for
      colorectal surgery: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled tri-
      als. Dis Colon Rectum. 2013;56:667–78.
32.   Raue W, Haase O, Junghans T, Scharfenberg M, Muller JM,
      Schwenk W. ‘Fast-track’ multimodal rehabilitation program
      improves outcome after laparoscopic sigmoidectomy: a con-
      trolled prospective evaluation. Surg Endosc. 2004;18:1463–8.
33.   Rawlinson A, Kang P, Evans J, Khanna A. A systematic review
      of enhanced recovery protocols in colorectal surgery. Ann R Coll
      Surg Engl. 2011;93:583–8.
34.   Tejedor P, Pastor C, Gonzalez-Ayora S, Ortega-Lopez M,
      Guadalajara H, Garcia-Olmo D. Short-term outcomes and ben-
      efits of ERAS program in elderly patients undergoing colorectal
      surgery: a case-matched study compared to conventional care.
      Int J Color Dis. 2018;33:1251–8.
35.   Gonzalez-Ayora S, Pastor C, Guadalajara H, et al. Enhanced recov-
      ery care after colorectal surgery in elderly patients. Compliance
      and outcomes of a multicenter study from the Spanish working
      group on ERAS. Int J Color Dis. 2016;31:1625–31.
36.   Boon K, Bislenghi G, D’Hoore A, Boon N, Wolthuis AM. Do
      older patients (> 80 years) also benefit from ERAS after colorec-
      tal resection? A safety and feasibility study. Aging Clin Exp Res.
      2021;33(5):1345–52.
37.   Keller DS, Lawrence JK, Nobel T, Delaney CP. Optimizing cost
      and short-term outcomes for elderly patients in laparoscopic
      colonic surgery. Surg Endosc. 2013;27:4463–8.
38.   Verheijen PM, Vd Ven AW, Davids PH, Vd Wall BJ, Pronk
      A. Feasibility of enhanced recovery programme in various
      patient groups. Int J Color Dis. 2012;27:507–11.
39.   Spinelli A, Bazzi P, Sacchi M, et al. Short-term outcomes of
      laparoscopy combined with enhanced recovery pathway after
      ileocecal resection for Crohn’s disease: a case-matched analysis.
      J Gastrointest Surg. 2013;17:126–32.
  Chapter 15. Enhanced Recovery Protocols: A Toolkit...         305

40. Hignett S, Parmar CD, Lewis W, Makin CA, Walsh CJ. Ileostomy
    formation does not prolong hospital length of stay after open
    anterior resection when performed within an enhanced recovery
    programme. Color Dis. 2011;13:1180–3.
41. Joh YG, Lindsetmo RO, Stulberg J, Obias V, Champagne
    B, Delaney CP. Standardized postoperative pathway: accel-
    erating recovery after ileostomy closure. Dis Colon Rectum.
    2008;51:1786–9.
42. Ottaviano K, Brookover R, Canete JJ, et al. The impact of an
    enhanced recovery program on loop ileostomy closure. Am Surg.
    2021;87(12):1920–5. https://doi.org/10.1177/0003134820982847.
43. Wood T, Aarts MA, Okrainec A, et al. Emergency room visits
    and readmissions following implementation of an enhanced
    recovery after surgery (iERAS) program. J Gastrointest Surg.
    2018;22:259–66.
44. Adamina M, Kehlet H, Tomlinson GA, Senagore AJ, Delaney
    CP. Enhanced recovery pathways optimize health outcomes and
    resource utilization: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled
    trials in colorectal surgery. Surgery. 2011;149:830–40.
45. Delaney CP, Chang E, Senagore AJ, Broder M. Clinical out-
    comes and resource utilization associated with laparoscopic
    and open colectomy using a large national database. Ann Surg.
    2008;247:819–24.
46. Jung AD, Dhar VK, Hoehn RS, et al. Enhanced recovery after
    colorectal surgery: can we afford not to use it. J Am Coll Surg.
    2018;226:586–93.
47. Khanijow AN, Wood LN, Xie R, et al. The impact of an enhanced
    recovery program (ERP) on the costs of colorectal surgery. Am
    J Surg. 2021;222(1):186–92.
48. Lee L, Li C, Landry T, et al. A systematic review of economic
    evaluations of enhanced recovery pathways for colorectal sur-
    gery. Ann Surg. 2014;259:670–6.
49. Lee L, Mata J, Ghitulescu GA, et al. Cost-effectiveness of
    enhanced recovery versus conventional perioperative manage-
    ment for colorectal surgery. Ann Surg. 2015;262:1026–33.
50. Roulin D, Donadini A, Gander S, et al. Cost-effectiveness of the
    implementation of an enhanced recovery protocol for colorectal
    surgery. Br J Surg. 2013;100:1108–14.
51. Sammour T, Zargar-Shoshtari K, Bhat A, Kahokehr A, Hill
    AG. A programme of Enhanced Recovery After Surgery
    (ERAS) is a cost-effective intervention in elective colonic sur-
    gery. N Z Med J. 2010;123:61–70.
306    D. S. Keller

52. Stone AB, Grant MC, Pio Roda C, et al. Implementation costs
    of an enhanced recovery after surgery program in the United
    States: a financial model and sensitivity analysis based on experi-
    ences at a quaternary academic medical center. J Am Coll Surg.
    2016;222:219–25.
53. Stowers MD, Lemanu DP, Hill AG. Health economics in
    enhanced recovery after surgery programs. Can J Anaesth.
    2015;62:219–30.
54. Patil S, Cornett EM, Jesunathadas J, et al. Implementing enhanced
    recovery pathways to improve surgical outcomes. J Anaesthesiol
    Clin Pharmacol. 2019;35:S24–8.
55. Levy BF, Scott MJ, Fawcett WJ, Rockall TA. 23-hour-stay laparo-
    scopic colectomy. Dis Colon Rectum. 2009;52:1239–43.
56. Delaney CP. Outcome of discharge within 24 to 72 hours
    after laparoscopic colorectal surgery. Dis Colon Rectum.
    2008;51:181–5.
57. Delaney CP, Fazio VW, Senagore AJ, Robinson B, Halverson AL,
    Remzi FH. ‘Fast track’ postoperative management protocol for
    patients with high co-morbidity undergoing complex abdominal
    and pelvic colorectal surgery. Br J Surg. 2001;88:1533–8.
58. Hughes M, Coolsen MM, Aahlin EK, et al. Attitudes of patients
    and care providers to enhanced recovery after surgery programs
    after major abdominal surgery. J Surg Res. 2015;193:102–10.
59. de Paula TR, Nemeth SK, Kurlansky P, Simon HL, Miller LL,
    Keller DS. A randomized controlled trial examining the impact
    of an anorectal surgery multimodal enhanced recovery program
    on opioid use. Ann Surg. 2022;275(1):e22–9; Publish Ahead of
    Print
60. Cakir H, van Stijn MF, Lopes Cardozo AM, et al. Adherence to
    enhanced recovery after surgery and length of stay after colonic
    resection. Color Dis. 2013;15:1019–25.
61. Jurt J, Slieker J, Frauche P, et al. Enhanced recovery after surgery:
    can we rely on the key factors or do we need the bel ensemble.
    World J Surg. 2017;41(10):2464–70.
62. Gustafsson UO, Hausel J, Thorell A, Ljungqvist O, Soop M,
    Nygren J. Adherence to the enhanced recovery after surgery
    protocol and outcomes after colorectal cancer surgery. Arch
    Surg. 2011;146:571–7.
63. Pecorelli N, Hershorn O, Baldini G, et al. Impact of adherence to
    care pathway interventions on recovery following bowel resec-
    tion within an established enhanced recovery program. Surg
    Endosc. 2017;31:1760–71.
  Chapter 15. Enhanced Recovery Protocols: A Toolkit...             307

64. Pedziwiatr M, Kisialeuski M, Wierdak M, et al. Early implemen-
    tation of Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS(R)) proto-
    col - compliance improves outcomes: a prospective cohort study.
    Int J Surg. 2015;21:75–81.
65. Wolk S, Distler M, Mussle B, Sothje S,Weitz J,Welsch T. Adherence
    to ERAS elements in major visceral surgery-an observational
    pilot study. Langenbeck’s Arch Surg. 2016;401:349–56.
66. Bakker N, Cakir H, Doodeman HJ, Houdijk AP. Eight years of
    experience with enhanced recovery after surgery in patients with
    colon cancer: impact of measures to improve adherence. Surgery.
    2015;157:1130–6.
67. Lyon A, Payne CJ, Mackay GJ. Enhanced recovery programme
    in colorectal surgery: does one size fit all? World J Gastroenterol.
    2012;18:5661–3.
68. Keller DS, Tantchou I, Flores-Gonzalez JR, Geisler DP. Predicting
    delayed discharge in a multimodal enhanced recovery pathway.
    Am J Surg. 2017;214:604–9.
69. Keller DS, Delaney CP, Senagore AJ, Feldman LS, SAGES
    SMARTTF. Uptake of enhanced recovery practices by SAGES
    members: a survey. Surg Endosc. 2017;31(9):3519–26.
70. Kehlet H, Joshi GP. Enhanced recovery after surgery: current
    controversies and concerns. Anesth Analg. 2017;125:2154–5.
71. Lilford RJ, Brown CA, Nicholl J. Use of process measures to
    monitor the quality of clinical practice. BMJ. 2007;335:648–50.
72. Desai NR, Ross JS, Kwon JY, et al. Association between hospital
    penalty status under the hospital readmission reduction p  ­ rogram
    and readmission rates for target and nontarget conditions.
    JAMA. 2016;316:2647–56.
73. Benneyan JC, Lloyd RC, Plsek PE. Statistical process control
    as a tool for research and healthcare improvement. Qual Saf
    Health Care. 2003;12:458–64.
74. Chen TT, Chang YJ, Ku SL, Chung KP. Statistical process
    control as a tool for controlling operating room performance:
    retrospective analysis and benchmarking. J Eval Clin Pract.
    2010;16:905–10.
75. Groom R, Likosky DS, Rutberg H. Understanding variation
    in cardiopulmonary bypass: statistical process control theory. J
    Extra Corpor Technol. 2004;36:224–30.
76. Keller DS, Stulberg JJ, Lawrence JK, Delaney CP. Process
    control to measure process improvement in colorectal surgery:
    modifications to an established enhanced recovery pathway. Dis
    Colon Rectum. 2014;57:194–200.
308    D. S. Keller

77. Keller DS, Stulberg JJ, Lawrence JK, Samia H, Delaney
    CP. Initiating statistical process control to improve quality out-
    comes in colorectal surgery. Surg Endosc. 2015;29(12):3559–64.
78. Keller DS, Reif de Paula T, Yu G, Zhang H, Al-Mazrou A,
    Kiran RP. Statistical Process Control (SPC) to drive improve-
    ment in length of stay after colorectal surgery. Am J Surg.
    2020;219:1006–11.
79. Mohammed MA. Using statistical process control to improve
    the quality of health care. Qual Saf Health Care. 2004;13:243–5.
80. Sedlack JD. The utilization of six sigma and statistical process
    control techniques in surgical quality improvement. J Healthc
    Qual. 2010;32:18–26.
81. Thor J, Lundberg J, Ask J, et al. Application of statistical process
    control in healthcare improvement: systematic review. Qual Saf
    Health Care. 2007;16:387–99.
82. Vetter TR, Morrice D. Statistical process control: no hits, no runs,
    no errors. Anesth Analg. 2019;128:374–82.
83. Breteler MJM, Numan L, Ruurda JP, et al. Wireless remote
    home monitoring of vital signs in patients discharged early after
    esophagectomy: observational feasibility study. JMIR Perioper
    Med. 2020;3:e21705.
84. Schwab M, Brindl N, Studier-Fischer A, et al. Postoperative
    complications and mobilisation following major abdomi-
    nal surgery with vs. without fitness tracker-based feedback
    (EXPELLIARMUS): study protocol for a student-led
    multicentre randomised controlled trial (CHIR-Net SIGMA
    ­
    study group). Trials. 2020;21:293.
85. Hedrick TL, Hassinger TE, Myers E, et al. Wearable technol-
    ogy in the perioperative period: predicting risk of postoperative
    complications in patients undergoing elective colorectal surgery.
    Dis Colon Rectum. 2020;63:538–44.
86. Kneuertz PJ, Jagadesh N, Perkins A, et al. Improving patient
    engagement, adherence, and satisfaction in lung cancer surgery
    with implementation of a mobile device platform for patient
    reported outcomes. J Thorac Dis. 2020;12:6883–91.
87. Schlund D, Poirier J, Bhama AR, et al. Value of an interactive
    phone application in an established enhanced recovery program.
    Int J Color Dis. 2020;35:1045–8.
88. Mata J, Pecorelli N, Kaneva P, et al. A mobile device application
    (app) to improve adherence to an enhanced recovery program
    for colorectal surgery: a randomized controlled trial. Surg
    Endosc. 2020;34:742–51.
  Chapter 15. Enhanced Recovery Protocols: A Toolkit...           309

89. Keller DS, Ermlich BO, Schiltz N, et al. The effect of transversus
    abdominis plane blocks on postoperative pain in laparoscopic
    colorectal surgery: a prospective, randomized, double-blind trial.
    Dis Colon Rectum. 2014;57:1290–7.
90. Marcotte JH, Patel KM, Gaughan JP, et al. Oral versus intrave-
    nous acetaminophen within an enhanced recovery after surgery
    protocol in colorectal surgery. Pain Physician. 2020;23:57–64.
91. Rice D, Rodriguez-Restrepo A, Mena G, et al. Matched pairs com-
    parison of an enhanced recovery pathway versus conventional
    management on opioid exposure and pain control in patients
    undergoing lung surgery. Ann Surg. 2021;274(6):1099–106.
92. Vincent WR, Huiras P, Empfield J, et al. Controlling postopera-
    tive use of i.v. acetaminophen at an academic medical center. Am
    J Health Syst Pharm. 2018;75:548–55.
Chapter 16
Perioperative Pain
Management for
Abdominal Operations
Tonia M. Young-Fadok




Introduction
A major role of the surgeon is to be well-versed with a broad
range of interventions, both those under the purview of our
Anesthesia colleagues and those which we may be best
placed to deliver or, in some cases, to request of our col-
leagues. A patient’s age, comorbidities, and allergies, as well
as resource availability and provider preference, will all have
an effect on the treatments used at individual institutions.
Nevertheless, the primary goal is to have a multimodal
opioid-­sparing analgesic regimen. Combining different classes
of analgesics can provide an additive or synergistic effect for
pain relief. These multimodal techniques have long been pro-
moted but have gained increased traction recently with the
more widespread adoption of enhanced recovery after


T. M. Young-Fadok (*)
Division of Colon and Rectal Surgery, Mayo Clinic,
Phoenix, AZ, USA
e-mail: youngfadok.tonia@mayo.edu

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature   311
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_16
312   T. M. Young-Fadok

surgery (ERAS®) pathways. Perioperative analgesia is just
one facet of ERAS® care pathways, which include a set of
evidence-­based practices to reduce perioperative stress, main-
tain postoperative physiological function, and accelerate
recovery.
   In addition to pain management strategies preoperatively
and postoperatively which are generally under surgical man-
agement, intraoperative pain management strategies include
systemic and regional anesthesia techniques. In the past, the
latter were solely under the purview of our Anesthesia col-
leagues. This is true of neuraxial techniques such as epidural
and spinal analgesia, and paravertebral and quadratus lumbo-
rum blocks, which are unique to anesthesiologists. However,
other blocks may be best performed by the surgeon. The type
of block is dependent on the nature of the operation and
available institutional expertise.


Summary

• The primary goal is to minimize pain while minimizing
  opioids and their side effects.
• No pain = no patient.
• Learn the anatomy of abdominal wall blocks.
• Become informed regarding systemic and regional pain
  management modalities.


Preoperative Measures

Patient Education

Setting appropriate expectations regarding postoperative
pain lays the foundation for the patient’s overall experience.
This groundwork discussion begins in the office during the
preoperative counseling session. Comprehensive education
can help alleviate the patient’s fear of the unknown and has
been demonstrated to reduce perioperative anxiety and
       Chapter 16.   Perioperative Pain Management for…     313

possibly reduce postoperative pain and opioid use in patients
undergoing abdominal operations. Such counseling can be
performed by the surgeon, anesthesiologist, or nurse
educator.
   In addition to providing education and setting expecta-
tions, the clinician should obtain information about the
patient’s past history. Important details to consider include
the patient’s comorbidities, allergies, and whether he or she
takes pain medications such as opioids chronically. The
planned surgical approach (minimally invasive or open)
should also be taken into consideration. The clinician should
adjust the analgesic regimen to account for these factors.


Receptor Blockade

Preemptive analgesia describes treatment that is initiated
before surgery to reduce sensitization of the peripheral and
central pain pathways. The tissue injury that occurs during
surgery causes propagation of nociceptive signals, which
increase responsiveness in peripheral and central neurons,
amplifying pain. Administration of analgesics prior to inci-
sion can blunt this response and reduce both postoperative
pain and the development of chronic pain.
   Acetaminophen, gabapentinoids (gabapentin and pregab-
alin), and COX-2 inhibitors such as celecoxib have all been
used for preemptive analgesia. They are available as oral
formulations and are cost-effective. These medications can be
used in combination and should be timed appropriately rela-
tive to the operation in order to achieve the maximum
opioid-­sparing effect, in order to decrease opioid-related side
effects. Adjustments should be made based on hepatic func-
tion (for acetaminophen), renal function, age, and allergies.
   Gabapentinoids were initially developed as anticonvul-
sants and have been used in the treatment of chronic neuro-
pathic pain. Prior studies demonstrating that administration
of a single preoperative dose of gabapentin or pregabalin was
associated with decreased postoperative pain and opioid
314   T. M. Young-Fadok

consumption were contradicted by studies showing no differ-
ence in pain scores and opioid consumption when patients
received a single preoperative dose of pregabalin between
100 and 300 mg. Benefits were only seen with multiple con-
tinued postoperative doses that can cause dizziness, sedation,
visual disturbance, and peripheral edema. Initial advice that
gabapentinoids should be given as a single, lowest possible
preoperative dose to limit side effects has been replaced with
advice to no longer use these agents.
   Celecoxib is a selective COX-2 inhibitor that acts by
reducing prostaglandin synthesis during inflammation. A
recent meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials demon-
strated that administration of celecoxib before noncardiac
surgery showed modest benefits in terms of postoperative
opioid consumption, pain scores, nausea, and vomiting. No
significant difference was noted between groups that received
200 mg versus 400 mg and between groups that received a
single preoperative dose versus continued postoperative
dosing.


Summary: Preoperative Receptor Blockade
• Celecoxib may be considered.
• Gabapentinoids have been removed due to side effects
  especially in the elderly.
• Acetaminophen may be given preoperatively or in an
  operation <6 h duration, held and given intravenously at
  the end of the case.


Intraoperative Measures
Coordination with the anesthesiology team is critical to suc-
cessful intraoperative pain management. There are several
options for pain control, including infusions and blocks. Some
can be administered by the anesthesiologist and some can be
administered by the surgeon, depending on the institution.
       Chapter 16.   Perioperative Pain Management for…     315

   The goal of the anesthetic regimen is to promote rapid
awakening with minimal side effects and to minimize the use
of opioids. Avoiding long-acting benzodiazepines, using pro-
pofol for induction of anesthesia, and using short-acting opi-
oids (fentanyl, sufentanil, remifentanil) help to minimize side
effects. To date there is no definitive data to indicate whether
use of anesthetic gases versus total intravenous anesthesia
(TIVA) offers a superior response regarding pain, although
TIVA helps to minimize the risk of postoperative nausea and
vomiting (PONV).


Prior to Incision: Anesthesiologist-Controlled

NMDA Antagonists

The N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) glutamate receptors are
involved with nociception and the development of chronic
pain. NMDA-receptor antagonists provide a nonopioid
mechanism of analgesia.
   Ketamine, used in subanesthetic doses at 0.1–0.5 mg/kg,
can be initiated prior to incision as a preemptive analgesic. It
can also be continued postoperatively in the management of
severe acute pain, hyperalgesia, and is also particularly useful
in patients with opioid tolerance. Side effects include neuro-
psychiatric effects, but they are typically nil when ketamine is
given at extremely low doses <0.1 mg/kg. Ketamine in sub-
anesthetic doses is associated with very little respiratory
depression and sedation and thus may be useful in patients
with morbid obesity. It is also associated with reduced need
for IV patient-controlled analgesia use and reduced postop-
erative nausea and vomiting.
   Magnesium infusion appears to be associated with reduced
postoperative pain and opioid consumption. The first ran-
domized trial to address the perioperative use of magnesium
occurred in 1996 [1] and showed that a 20% magnesium
15 mL bolus followed by an infusion of 2.5 ml/h for 20 h
reduced pain and morphine consumption in patients under-
316   T. M. Young-Fadok

going total abdominal hysterectomy. A 2013 systematic
review [2] demonstrated a reduction in morphine consump-
tion by 24.4% following administration of magnesium, with
no statistically significant difference between patients who
received bolus only, bolus with infusion, or infusion only.
Further meta-analyses and systematic reviews have sup-
ported these findings. Common dosing regimens involve a
bolus of 30–50 mg/kg and infusions of 8–15 mg/kg/h.

Lidocaine Infusion

Intravenous lidocaine can be given preoperatively as part of
a multimodal analgesic regimen. A systematic review indi-
cated that perioperative lidocaine was associated with
reduced postoperative pain, opioid requirements, duration of
ileus, nausea/vomiting, and length of stay. The effects were
most notable in patients undergoing abdominal procedures.
Intravenous lidocaine can be used as an alternative to neur-
axial or regional anesthesia when those measures are contra-
indicated or unsuccessful. Longer-acting local anesthetics are
not used in intravenous infusion due to risk of toxicity, includ-
ing cardiac arrest and death. The availability of intravenous
lidocaine as a component of the perioperative analgesic regi-
men may be institution-dependent.

Continuous Epidural Analgesia

Continuous epidural anesthesia has been shown to offer
improved postoperative analgesia, decreased pulmonary and
cardiac morbidity, and earlier return of gastrointestinal func-
tion in patients who undergo open abdominal operations. The
benefits in minimally invasive operations are less certain.
Local anesthetics such as bupivacaine and ropivacaine are
commonly used for epidural anesthesia. Opioids such as fen-
tanyl and hydromorphone can be added as well but may be
absorbed systemically and cause opioid-related side effects of
nausea, vomiting, pruritus, and respiratory depression.
       Chapter 16.   Perioperative Pain Management for…     317

Anticoagulants should be administered with caution in these
patients due to the risk of epidural hematoma. Adverse
effects of local anesthetics given via epidural include hypo-
tension, sensory deficits, motor weakness, and urinary reten-
tion. In individuals with morbid obesity, the compression on
the epidural space can lead to a need for increased doses and
precipitate a high block that necessitates airway manage-
ment. The excess weight can also exacerbate cardiac side
effects of the local anesthetic.

Spinal Analgesia

Single-dose administration of epidural or spinal opioids can
be associated with reduced pain and reduced requirement for
systemic opioids but is also associated with the typical con-
stellation of opioid-induced side effects, including ileus in up
to a third of patients. Options include lipophilic opioids (fen-
tanyl and sufentanil), which have a more rapid onset but a
shorter duration of action, and hydrophilic opioids (mor-
phine and hydromorphone), which have slower onset but
longer duration.

Paravertebral Block

This block involves injection of local anesthetic immediately
adjacent to the thoracic vertebra, where the spinal nerve
emerges from the intervertebral foramen. It is highly
dermatome-­dependent and has primarily been utilized for
unilateral hernia repair or breast surgery, although the poten-
tial uses are being expanded. Inadvertent pleural puncture
and iatrogenic pneumothorax are the primary risks; ultra-
sound has improved the safety and efficacy. However, the use
of paravertebral blocks for abdominal operations remains
somewhat limited, as the anesthetic coverage for these proce-
dures necessitates bilateral injections at multiple dermatomal
levels.
318          T. M. Young-Fadok

Quadratus Lumborum Block

The quadratus lumborum (QL) block refers to a set of four
anatomically defined blocks that are categorized based on
where the local anesthetic is injected relative to the QL
muscle: lateral (QL1), posterior (QL2), anterior (QL3), and
intramuscular (QL IM) (Fig. 16.1). The lateral QL1 block reli-
ably covers T10-L1, and the posterior QL2 and anterior QL3
blocks cover T4 to T12/L1. Thus, the QL2 and QL3 blocks are
useful in cases where incisions extend both above and below
the umbilicus. Local spread to the paravertebral and epidural
area may also account for a portion of their analgesic effect.
   While these blocks provide reliable anesthesia, reduce
opioid consumption, and improve pain scores, there are a few
drawbacks. The blocks are typically performed with the
patient in both lateral decubitus positions, are best performed
with ultrasound, and require intermediate to advanced skills
to perform, adding to procedure time. Lower extremity weak-
ness is a frequent side effect, occurring in 1% of QL1 blocks,
19% of QL2 blocks, and up to 90% of QL3 blocks.

                                    QLB1




                                                            External oblique muscle
                             QLB2
                                                            Internal oblique muscle

                                                            Transversue abdominalis
                                                            muscle


   Quadratus Iumborum muscle

   Latissimus dorsi muscle


Transmuscular                              Middle TLF
QLB                                        Anterior TLF
                                           Spinal nerve
 Posterior TLF



                                           Psoas major
Erector spinae muscle
                                           muscle
                                           Lumbar artery
  Articular process




                                           Vertebral body




Figure 16.1 Quadratus lumborum blocks. (Source: NYSORA.com
(https://www.nysora.com))
       Chapter 16.   Perioperative Pain Management for…      319

Summary

• Consider magnesium infusion to block NMDA receptors.
• Consider ketamine infusion or boluses to block NMDA
  receptors.
• Consider lidocaine infusion.
• Epidural analgesia is effective for open cases but may
  increase length of stay of laparoscopic cases.
• Long-acting narcotic spinals are effective for pain relief
  but associated with ileus.
• Quadratus lumborum blocks provide effective pain relief,
  but there is a trade-off between effectiveness above T10
  (umbilicus) and lower extremity weakness.
• Paravertebral blocks are effective but primarily reserved
  for cases involving limited dermatomes given the need to
  inject bilaterally at all involved dermatomes.


After Incision

Ultrasound-guided transversus abdominis plane (TAP)
blocks may be placed by the anesthesiologist prior to incision,
but TAP blocks placed by the surgeon became very popular
after popularization of the “two-click” technique.
Unfortunately, this was a misguided attempt to simplify the
technique and is only applicable to a very specific anatomic
approach, in the triangle of Petit. The most accurate – and
hence most effective – TAP blocks should be placed using
ultrasound to visualize the correct plane on the surface of the
transversus abdominis muscle, beneath the fascia separating
this muscle from the internal oblique muscle.
   The (TAP) block was first introduced in 2001 by Rafi and
was described as a blind anatomy-guided technique aimed at
placing a single injection of local anesthetic into the lumbar
triangle of Petit, bordered by the external oblique, latissimus
dorsi, and iliac crest. Since 2007, ultrasound guidance has
been used to direct injection of local anesthetic into the trans-
versus abdominis plane, through which branches from T6-L1
320   T. M. Young-Fadok

run to innervate the anterior abdominal wall. Anteriorly, this
plane lies between the overlap of the lateral rectus abdominis
and the transversus abdominis muscles. Posterolaterally, the
plane is found beneath the fascial layer between the internal
oblique and the transversus abdominis, i.e., the nerves are
intimately associated with the surface of the transversus
abdominis muscle, beneath the fascia separating this muscle
from the internal oblique. After coursing between the inner-
most and internal intercostal muscles, the T6-T8 intercostal
nerves enter the plane at the level of the costal margin. These
nerves then splay out with multiple interconnections, forming
the cephalic TAP plexus. The T9-T12 nerves enter the plane
posterior to the midaxillary line and similarly form intercon-
nections to form the caudad TAP plexus. The associated lat-
eral cutaneous branches arise before the main nerves enter
the TAP plane and supply the lateral abdominal wall between
the costal margin and iliac crest.
    Because the plane is large and the nerves enter at various
points, there are three main approaches to access the trans-
versus abdominis plane, all named according to their point of
entry. The posterior approach accesses the compartment at
the level of the lumbar triangle of Petit or the anterolateral
aspect of the quadratus lumborum. Because these landmarks
can be difficult to identify in patients who are obese (due to
increased depth) or elderly (due to decreased muscle mass),
the addition of ultrasound greatly facilitates placement of the
block. Ultrasound guidance drastically improves correct
placement of the block into the correct plane, compared to
both blind and laparoscopic-guided techniques. With the
addition of ultrasound, a lateral approach between the midax-
illary and anterior axillary line may also augment the ability
to visualize the layers in the abdominal wall. The subcostal
approach utilizes ultrasound to inject local anesthetic between
the rectus and transversus abdominis muscles near the
xiphoid; the needle is then directed inferolaterally to distend
the transversus abdominis plane.
    Ultrasound has also been used to perform posterior TAP
blocks, targeting the intersection of the oblique and transversus
        Chapter 16.   Perioperative Pain Management for…       321

abdominis muscles with the quadratus lumborum, just superfi-
cial to the transversalis fascia (Fig. 16.2). Volunteer studies have
demonstrated that with this approach, the local anesthetic
spreads to both the transversus abdominis plan and the para-
vertebral space. This suggests that posterior TAP blocks may
have a dual mechanism of action.
   Randomized controlled trials have compared ultrasound-­
guided posterior, lateral, and subcostal TAP blocks. Four tri-
als demonstrated that subcostal TAP blocks resulted in lower
pain scores within the first 24 h following cholecystectomy
[3–6], although interestingly one other study showed no dif-
ference [7]. Posterior TAP blocks appeared superior to lateral
TAP blocks in patients undergoing Caesarian section and




Figure 16.2 Ultrasound-guided TAP block anatomy. Visualized are
the external oblique muscle (EOM), internal oblique muscle (IOM),
and transversus abdominis muscle (TAM). The TAP plane is high-
lighted – on the surface of the TAM and beneath the fascia separat-
ing it from the IOM. (Source: NYSORA.com (https://www.nysora.
com))
322   T. M. Young-Fadok

appeared to anesthetize more dermatomes compared to lat-
eral TAP blocks in patients undergoing laparoscopic gyneco-
logic surgery. Taken together, this suggests that the subcostal
and posterior approaches should be considered in place of
the lateral approach.
    Studies investigating the overall effect of TAP block have
yielded somewhat mixed results, possibly due to the relatively
short duration of the block. Long-acting liposomal bupiva-
caine has been approved for TAP blocks as the block does
not target a specific nerve, but rather a plane. A recent ran-
domized controlled trial comparing regular bupivacaine to
liposomal bupivacaine during TAP blocks in patients under-
going colorectal resection demonstrated no difference
between opioid consumption and pain scores within the first
72 h [8]. The block can be performed before the incision or
after the procedure is complete, by either the Anesthesiology
or the surgical team.
    Continuous infusion catheters can be inserted into the
TAP space to potentially prolong the duration of the block.
In a 2015 study [9], healthy volunteers underwent a TAP
block with ropivacaine, followed by continuous catheter infu-
sion of ropivacaine on one side and placebo on the other.
There was decreased extension of the block after 4–8 h, and
there were notably fewer dermatomes anesthetized on the
placebo side at 24 h compared to the ropivacaine side.
However, a recent study evaluated single-injection TAP
­versus TAP injection plus continuous catheter infusion of
 ropivacaine in patients undergoing laparoscopic live donor
 nephrectomy [10]. In these surgical patients, there was no dif-
 ference between the two groups.

Transversalis Fascia Block

The transversalis fascia (TF) block was developed in an effort
to provide an efficient, simple, safe, and effective abdominal
wall block that did not require any ultrasound expertise. The
transversalis fascia courses posteromedially and becomes
           Chapter 16.    Perioperative Pain Management for…   323

contiguous with the fascial planes investing the QL muscle.
Once the surgeon has gained intraabdominal access, the fas-
cia can be accessed more posteriorly and therefore closer to
the nerve root than an ultrasound-guided TAP block. A lapa-
roscopic decompression needle with a beveled tip is con-
nected to a 20-ml syringe with connector tubing. The TF is
identified caudad to the costal margin, as laterally as possible,
just before it courses behind the retroperitoneal fat at the
lateral peritoneal reflection. The needle is guided into this
location via an ipsilateral lower abdominal port, with the
bevel oriented medially. A single “click” confirms placement
under the fascia, and the injectate is administered (Fig. 16.3).
    A cadaveric study [11] has confirmed that the TF block has
improved longitudinal and posterolateral spread of the injec-
tate, with consistent spread to the intercostal (T8-T12) and
ilioinguinal/iliohypogastric nerves (L1). Quality improve-
ment studies have demonstrated a 70% reduction in opioid
use with the TF block, compared to a blind laparoscopic TAP
block.


           Peritoneum
      External oblique
  Transeversalis fascia
       Internal oblique
          Renal fascia
Transversus abdominis
                Kidney
          Psoas major

  Anterior layer of TLF
 Subcutaneous fascia
 Quadratus lumborum
      Latissimus dorsi
   Middle layer of TLF
        Erector spinae
 Posterior layer of TLF




Figure 16.3 Anatomy relevant to transversalis fascia (TF) block.
(Source: NYSORA.com (https://www.nysora.com))
324   T. M. Young-Fadok

Rectus Block

The rectus block reliably provides analgesia to the entire
midline in the area innervated by the T7-T11 nerves. The TAP
block reliably only covers the abdomen below the umbilicus;
thus, in cases where an incision is present above the umbili-
cus, the rectus block is an excellent supplement. The local
anesthetic is deposited in the posterior rectus space just
below the costal margin. Ultrasound or laparoscopic guid-
ance can be used to ensure correct placement of a single
injection. Alternatively, the block can be performed with
placement of continuous infusion catheter, following
hydrodissection with 20 mL of local anesthetic such as bupi-
vacaine. This approach has been found to be effective at
reducing opioid use following laparotomy (Fig. 16.4).




Figure 16.4 Relevant ultrasound anatomy for rectus block. The
injectate is delivered between the muscle and the posterior sheath,
as indicated by the highlighted area. (Source: NYSORA.com
(https://www.nysora.com))
       Chapter 16.   Perioperative Pain Management for…     325

Intercostal Block

While traditionally used for thoracic surgery or to treat pain
associated with rib fractures, the intercostal block can also be
considered for open upper abdominal incisions. The block
targets the ventral rami of the sensory nerve within the neu-
rovascular bundle at the inferior aspect of each rib. The chief
risk is that of pneumothorax, which may occur in 1–2% of
cases. Tube thoracostomy may be required, but this is fairly
rare; observation and supplemental oxygen are frequently
sufficient.
   The relatively short duration of action of the local anes-
thetic limits the effectiveness of the intercostal block.
Catheters inserted into the intercostal space can be used for
continuous infusion, which has been shown to reduce analge-
sic requirements following open cholecystectomy. Use of an
extended-release formulation such as liposomal bupivacaine
has been shown to have decreased intubation requirements
and ICU/hospital length of stay in patients with rib fractures
when compared to epidural analgesia [12]. The thoracic sur-
gery literature has also demonstrated that these two tech-
niques have a similar safety profile.

Local Wound Infiltration

The technique of simply infiltrating local anesthetic in the
tissues adjacent to the wound should not be dismissed. The
surgeon and anesthesiologist should carefully consider the
overall dose, the volume of tissue to be anesthetized, as well
as the duration of the operation when determining the injec-
tate. Short- and intermediate-duration anesthetics such as
lidocaine should be mixed with longer-acting anesthetics such
as bupivacaine and ropivacaine if an earlier onset of analge-
sia is required for a shorter operation. Liposomal bupivacaine
could also be used; however, it has a decreased spread com-
pared to standard bupivacaine, so more passes of the needle
are required to achieve a better effect.
326   T. M. Young-Fadok

Intraperitoneal Lidocaine

Administration of intraperitoneal lidocaine has been most
frequently studied following either laparoscopic cholecystec-
tomy or gynecologic procedures A 2000 study showed that
15-minute instillation of 200 mL of saline mixed with 200 mg
of lidocaine under the right diaphragmatic surface resulted in
no pain on deep inspiration in 72% of lidocaine group versus
8% of the control group, as well as reduced analgesic require-
ments in the immediate 24 h after surgery [13]. A 2017 ran-
domized trial in women undergoing Cesarean section showed
a reduction in opioid use following administration of intra-
peritoneal lidocaine [14]. While the administration of intra-
peritoneal lidocaine is fairly simple, it has not gained
widespread popularity. A 2011 randomized controlled trial
showed similar reductions in pain scores and fentanyl use in
patients who received either intravenous or intraperitoneal
lidocaine with laparoscopic appendectomy [15], indicating
that the more readily accessible intravenous route provides
similarly effective analgesia.


Postoperative Measures
Some of the interventions discussed in the previous section
on intraoperative measures can carry over into the postop-
erative phase, including anesthetic blocks, ketamine infusion,
and lidocaine infusion. These may be initiated prior to inci-
sion or may be performed after the procedure is complete.
   It is important to continue a multimodal opioid-sparing
regimen in the postoperative phase. Multiple enhanced
recovery after surgery (ERAS) guidelines recommend using
scheduled acetaminophen and nonsteroidal anti-­inflammatory
drugs (NSAIDs) as the foundation of a multimodal regimen,
assuming no medical contraindications. Other nonopioid
medications provide a supplemental effect. Opioids should
be administered on an as-needed basis as a rescue analgesic.
       Chapter 16.   Perioperative Pain Management for…    327

    Acetaminophen can be given as an intravenous or oral
form and should be given as a scheduled dose. When com-
bined with opioids, it not only improves analgesia but also
promotes an opioid-sparing effect with reduced nausea, vom-
iting, and sedation. As it is cleared by the liver, acetamino-
phen should be avoided in cases of renal insufficiency. The
maximum daily dose as recommended by the manufacturer
of Tylenol is 3 g per day in an adult.
    NSAIDs have an additive effect when given with acet-
aminophen, hence the reason these medications form the
backbone of the multimodal regimen as recommended in
multiple ERAS guidelines. NSAIDs can be given in an intra-
venous format (ketorolac) or oral format (ibuprofen,
naproxen, or COX-2 inhibitor celecoxib). They have a potent
analgesic effect; 600 mg of ibuprofen can be as efficacious as
15 mg of oxycodone. When given with opioids, they have an
opioid-sparing effect and a resultant decrease in opioid-­
related side effects such as nausea and vomiting. They should
be administered on a scheduled rather than an as-needed
basis if possible. Side effects of NSAIDs include gastrointes-
tinal irritation or bleeding, platelet dysfunction, and renal
dysfunction. Nonselective NSAIDs are generally avoided
after bariatric operations due to the risk of ulceration and
bleeding. COX-2 inhibitors such as celecoxib can be used
instead.
    Interestingly, a meta-analysis from 2014 found no increased
postoperative bleeding between a group of postoperative
patients taking ketorolac and a control group [16]. Another
study comparing ketorolac to an IV opioid found no increase
in gastrointestinal or operative site bleeding except in study
participants aged 75 and older [17]. There is some data to sug-
gest an association between postoperative NSAID use and
increased anastomotic leak [18, 19]; however, further studies
are needed to evaluate this claim.
    Transdermal lidocaine, frequently placed as a patch, is gen-
erally well-tolerated and has a reasonably low-risk profile,
particularly when compared to the other available opioid and
nonopioid options. However, its use is contraindicated within
328   T. M. Young-Fadok

96 h of administration of intraoperative liposomal bupiva-
caine, so this will be highly dependent on institutional avail-
ability of liposomal bupivacaine.
   The exact dosing regimen for gabapentinoids postopera-
tively is unclear, but pregabalin and gabapentin were often
used as part of a multimodal regimen. Compared to the other
nonopioid options, however, gabapentinoids have more
adverse effects that can act synergistically with opioids,
including sedation and dizziness, and for this reason have
been removed from many ERAS protocols.
   Tramadol has a weak opioid-type mechanism, as it targets
mu receptors weakly. It also inhibits reuptake of serotonin
and norepinephrine as a nonopioid mechanism of action.
Overall, tramadol has a lower risk of addiction, constipation,
and respiratory depression. The last feature makes it a more
attractive option for pain management in patients with mor-
bid obesity, compared to opioids. Tramadol does increase the
risk of seizure and so should be used with caution in patients
with a history of seizure.
   Opioid medications have been central to the management
of postoperative pain. However, their side effects of nausea,
vomiting, constipation, ileus, sedation, and respiratory depres-
sion serve to inhibit a patient’s recovery. The majority of
enhanced recovery pathways therefore highlight the use of a
multimodal pain regimen with scheduled nonopioid analge-
sics, with opioids reserved for breakthrough pain when the
multiple above measures fail. While it is challenging to
achieve a completely opioid-free postoperative course in
abdominal surgery, the use of a multimodal regimen as part
of an ERAS pathway has been shown to consistently reduce
opioid requirements.


Non-pharmacologic Measures

A few other non-pharmacologic adjuncts can contribute to a
patient’s postoperative pain management. Application of ice
and/or heat may provide some measure of pain relief.
       Chapter 16.   Perioperative Pain Management for…      329

Additionally, abdominal surgery can often result in ileus, the
discomfort which may be relieved by early ambulation.
Abdominal binders have been shown to decrease pain and
improve mobility following abdominal surgery. Other
adjuncts with a potentially positive effect include music
therapy, aromatherapy, and acupuncture. These therapies
should be used in addition to pharmacologic methods, and
their availability certainly varies by institution.


Summary (Table 16.1)

• Acetaminophen 1000 mg q 8 h
• NSAID q 8 h (scheduled at 4-h point between acetamino-
  phen doses)
• Low-dose ketamine infusion
• Transdermal lidocaine patches (if liposomal bupivacaine
  not used)
• Non-pharmacologic measures
  –– Reassurance and education
  –– Abdominal binder
  –– Ice packs
  –– Heating pads
  –– Music therapy
  –– Aromatherapy
  –– Acupuncture

Table 16.1 Summary of perioperative pain control measures
Preoperative   Non-­                 Pharmacologic
               pharmacologic
                Patient education/    Acetaminophen
                setting expectation
                                      Celecoxib
                                      [Gabapentinoids
                                      (gabapentin, pregabalin)
                                      currently not
                                      recommended]
                                                      (continued)
330   T. M. Young-Fadok

Table 16.1 (continued)
Intraoperative   Blocks                 Medications
                 Continuous             NMDA antagonists
                 epidural anesthesia    (ketamine, magnesium)
                 Spinal analgesia       Intravenous lidocaine
                 Paravertebral          Intraperitoneal lidocaine
                 block
                 Quadratus
                 lumborum block
                 TAP block
                 Transversalis fascia
                 block
                 Rectus block
                 Intercostal block
                 Local wound
                 infiltration
Postoperative    Non-­                  Pharmacologic
                 pharmacologic
                 Ice/heat               Acetaminophen
                 Ambulation             NSAIDs (ketorolac,
                                        ibuprofen, naproxen)
                 Abdominal binder       [Gabapentin – not
                                        recommended]
                 Acupuncture            Lidocaine patch
                 Aromatherapy           Tramadol
                 Music therapy          Opioids
       Chapter 16.   Perioperative Pain Management for…       331

• Short-acting opioid (fentanyl, etc.)
• Weak opioid (tramadol, etc.)
• Opioids for breakthrough


Special Considerations

Chronic Opioid Use

It should be the team’s goal to minimize the use of opioids in
the management of postoperative pain overall. Patients who
take opioids chronically should be considered the major
exception to this rule. We have found it helpful to continue
the patient’s baseline opioid schedule to prevent withdrawal
and also use multimodality pain management to avoid escala-
tion of their baseline needs. A ketamine infusion is frequently
used in these patients, as it tends to work very well in cases of
chronic opioid use. Working with an in-house pain manage-
ment service and/or coordination with the patient’s outpa-
tient pain specialist is essential in these cases.


Morbid Obesity

Obesity causes unpredictability of the pharmacokinetics and
pharmacodynamics of the drugs used in a multimodal pain
regimen. There are several reasons for this. Due to increased
adiposity, the volume of distribution will be significantly
altered. Hepatic clearance of drugs is generally unchanged
but could become affected if the patient has fatty infiltration,
fibrosis, or cirrhosis of the liver. Renal clearance may initially
be increased due to higher renal blood flow but may become
decreased later on if renal dysfunction sets in. Additionally,
obstructive sleep apnea makes patients more susceptible to
opioid-induced respiratory depression. It is therefore all the
more important to avoid opioids and to carefully utilize a
multimodal regimen in these patients.
332    T. M. Young-Fadok

Disclaimer The field of ERAS incorporates available evidence to optimize
recovery of patients undergoing an operation. It is an exciting and rapidly
evolving field, as evidenced by the following: Between inception and comple-
tion of this chapter, gabapentinoids went from being a part of many pain
management protocols to being excluded from them as evidence became
available regarding side effects that negated their benefits.



References
 1. Tramer MR, Schneider J, Marti RA, Rifat K. Role of magnesium
    sulfate in analgesia. Anesth. 1996;84(2):340–7.
 2. Albrecht E, Kirkham KR, Liu SS, Brull R. Peri-operative intra-
    venous administration of magnesium sulfate and post-operative
    pain: a meta-analysis. Anaesthesia. 2013;68(1):79–90.
 3. Khan KK, Khan RI. Analgesic effect of bilateral subcostal TAP
    block after laparoscopic cholecystectomy. J Ayub Med Coll
    Abbottabad. 2018;30(1):12–5.
 4. Baral B, Poudel PR. Comparison of analgesic efficacy of ultra-
    sound guided subcostal transversus abdominis plane block with
    port site infiltration following laparoscopic cholecystectomy. J
    Nepal Health Res Counc. 2019;16(41):457–61.
 5. Ramkiran S, Jacob M, Honwad M, Vivekanad D, Krishnakumar
    M, Patrikar S. Ultrasound-guided combined fascial plane blocks
    as an intervention for pain management after laparoscopic cho-
    lecystectomy: a randomized control study. Anesth Essays Res.
    2018;12(1):16–23.
 6. Bhatia N, Arora S, Jyotsna W, Kaur G. Comparison of poste-
    rior and subcostal approaches to ultrasound-guided transverse
    abdominis plane black for postoperative analgesia in laparo-
    scopic cholecystectomy. J Clin Anesth. 2014;26(4):294–9.
 7. Houben AM, Moreau AJ, Detry OM, Kaba A, Joris JL. Bilateral
    subcostal transversus abdominis plane block does not improve
    the postoperative analgesia provided by multimodal analgesia
    after laparoscopic cholecystectomy: a randomized placebo-­
    controlled trial. Eur J Anaesthesiol. 2019;36(10):772–7.
 8. Guerra L, Philip S, Lax EA, Smithson L, Pearlman R, Damadi
    A. Transversus abdominis plane blocks in laparoscopic colorec-
    tal surgery: better pain control and patient outcomes with liposo-
    mal bupivacaine than bupivacaine. Am Surg. 2019;85(9):1013–6.
 9. Petersen PL, Hilsted KL, Dahl JB, Mathiesen O. Bilateral trans-
    versus abdominis plane (TAP) block with 24 hours ropivacaine
          Chapter 16.    Perioperative Pain Management for…          333

      infusion via TAP catheters: a randomized trail in healthy volun-
      teers. BMC Anesthiol. 2013;13(1):30.
10.   Yeap YL, Wolfe JW, Kroepfl E, Fridell J, Powelson JA. Transversus
      abdominis plane (TAP) block for laparoscopic live donor
      nephrectomy: continuous catheter infusion provides no addi-
      tional analgesic benefit over single-injection ropivacaine. Clin
      Transpl. 2020;34(6):e13861.
11.   Garbin M, Portela DA, Bertolizio G, Gallastegui A, Otero PE. A
      novel ultrasound-guided lateral quadratus lumborum block in
      dogs: a comparative cadaveric study of two approaches. Vet
      Anaesth Analg. 2020;47(6):810–8.
12.   Sheets NW, Davis JW, Dirks RC, Pang AW, Kwok AM, et al.
      Intercostal nerve block with liposomal bupivacaine vs epidural
      analgesia for the treatment of traumatic rib fracture. J Am Coll
      Surg. 2020;231(1):150–4.
13.   Elhakim M, Elkott M, Ali NM, Tahoun HM. Intraperitoneal lido-
      caine for postoperative pain after laparoscopy. Acta Anaesthesiol
      Scand. 2000;44(3):280–4.
14.   Patel R, Carvalho JCA, Downey K, Kanczuk M, Bernstein P,
      Siddiqui N. Intraperitoneal instillation of lidocaine improves post-
      operative analgesia at cesarian delivery: a randomized double-­
      blind, placebo-controlled trial. Anesth Analg. 2017;124(2):554–9.
15.   Kim TH, Kang H, Hong JH, Park JS, Baek CW, et al.
      Intraperitoneal and intravenous lidocaine for effective pain
      relief after laparoscopic appendectomy: a prospective, ran-
      domized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. Surg Endosc.
      2011;25(10):3183–90.
16.   Gobble RM, Hoang HLT, Kacniarz B, Orgill DP. Ketorolac does
      not increase perioperative bleeding: a meta-analysis of random-
      ized controlled trials. Plastic Reconstr Surg. 2014;133(3):741–55.
17.   Strom BL, Berlin JA, Kinman JL, Spitz PW, Hennessy S, et al.
      Parenteral ketorolac and the risk of gastrointestinal and opera-
      tive site bleeding. A postmarketing surveillance study. JAMA.
      1996;275(5):376–82.
18.   Modasi A, Pace D, Godwin M, Smith C, Curtis B. NSAID admin-
      istration post colorectal surgery increases anastomotic leak rate:
      systematic review/meta-analysis. Surg Endosc. 2019;33(3):879–85.
19.   Huang Y, Tang SR, Young CJ. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
      drugs and anastomotic dehiscence after colorectal surgery: a
      meta-analysis. ANZ J Surg. 2018;88(10):959–65.
334    T. M. Young-Fadok

Selected Reading and Resources
Gustafsson UO, Scott MJ, Hubner M, Nygren J, Demartines N,
   Francis N, Rockall TA, Young-Fadok TM, Hill AG, Soop M, de
   Boer HD, Urman RD, Chang GJ, Fichera A, Kessler H, Grass F,
   Whang EE, Fawcett WJ, Carli F, Lobo DN, Rollins KE, Balfour A,
   Baldini G, Riedel B, Ljungqvist O. Guidelines for perioperative
   care in elective colorectal surgery: enhanced recovery after sur-
   gery (ERAS((R))) society recommendations: 2018. World J Surg.
   2019;43(3):659–95. PMID: 30426190. https://doi.org/10.1007/
   s00268-­0 18-­4844-­y.
https://www.nysora.com: NOTE: This online resource includes highly
   detailed anatomic illustrations. Its illustrations may be repro-
   duced by any entity acknowledging the source without requiring
   additional permission. Highly recommended.
Young-Fadok T, Craner RC. Regional anesthesia techniques for
   abdominal operations. In: Ljungqvist O, Francis NK, Urman RD,
   editors. Enhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS®), a complete
   guide to optimizing outcomes. Cham: Springer; 2020. p. 149–62.
Chapter 17
Classification
and Analysis of Error
Cara A. Liebert and Sherry M. Wren




Background
The Institute of Medicine estimates that medical errors cause
between 44,000 and 98,000 preventable hospital deaths and
one million injuries per year in the USA [1]. One study has
suggested that 70% of adverse events are preventable, with
the most common types being technical errors (44%),
­diagnostic errors (17%), failure to prevent injury (12%), and
 medication errors (10%) [1, 2]. Preventable errors result in a
 total estimated cost of between $17 billion and $29 billion per
 year in US hospitals [1]. The National Quality Forum (NQF)
 in 2002 defined “never events” as errors in medical care that
 are clearly identifiable, preventable, and serious in their con-
 sequences for patients and that indicate a real problem in the

C. A. Liebert
Department of Surgery, Stanford University School of Medicine,
VA Palo Alto Health Care System, Palo Alto, CA, USA
e-mail: cara.liebert@stanford.edu
S. M. Wren (*)
Department of Surgery, Center for Innovation and Global Health,
Stanford University School of Medicine, VA Palo Alto Health Care
System, Palo Alto, CA, USA
e-mail: swren@stanford.edu

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature   335
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_17
336   C. A. Liebert and S. M. Wren

safety and credibility of a healthcare facility [3]. In 2011, the
NQF updated this list and delineated five specific events for
surgery or invasive procedures: (a) surgery or other invasive
procedure performed on the wrong site, (b) surgery or other
invasive procedure performed on the wrong patient, (c)
wrong surgical or other invasive procedure performed on a
patient, (d) unintended retention of a foreign object in a
patient after surgery or other invasive procedure, and (e)
intraoperative or immediately postoperative/post-procedure
death in an ASA Class 1 patient [4].
   It is estimated that over 4000 surgical “never event” mal-
practice claims occur each year in the USA, resulting in mor-
tality in 7% of these cases, permanent injury in 33%, and
temporary injury in 59% [5]. Since the Institute of Medicine’s
report To Err Is Human, there has been considerable atten-
tion to improving patient safety through identification and
reduction of potentially avoidable errors across all healthcare
delivery systems.


Medical Error
A medical error is an unintended act or action that does not
achieve its intended outcome and can range from non-­
consequential to life-threatening [6]. Errors can stem from
the failure of a planned action to be completed as intended or
the use of a wrong plan to achieve an aim [1]. Human errors
in medicine are further defined as a flaw in reasoning, under-
standing, or decision-making of a health problem or execu-
tion of a clinical task [7]. Examples in the care of surgical
patients include transfusion errors, medication errors,
wrong-­
­       site surgery, wrong-procedure surgery, retained for-
eign objects, and iatrogenic injuries. Factors that contribute to
errors include individual factors as well as flaws in healthcare
systems that fail to prevent errors from occurring. Due to the
high acuity and high stress environment, errors with serious
consequences are most likely to occur in operating rooms,
emergency departments, and intensive care units. Common
medical error terms are defined in Table 17.1.
            Chapter 17. Classification and Analysis of Error        337

Table 17.1 Error definitions and related terms
Term        Definition
Medical     Unintended act or one that does not achieve
error       its intended outcome and can range from non-­
            consequential to life-threatening [6]
Human          A flaw in reasoning, understanding, or decision-­
error          making of a health problem or execution of a clinical
               task [7]
Active         Unsafe acts committed by providers in the form of
failure        slips, lapses, mistakes, and procedural violations [8]
Latent         Healthcare system failures that are often hidden and
failure        can lead to either error-prone situations or holes in
               the defense against active failures [7]
Adverse        An unexpected and undesired incident that harms
event          a patient as a direct result of the care or services
               provided [7]
Sentinel       Patient safety event that results in death, permanent
event          harm, or severe temporary harm [9]
Surgical       Medical errors associated with serious harm to
never          patients, such as retained foreign bodies, wrong-site
event          surgery, wrong-patient surgery, and wrong-procedure
               surgery [5]
Near miss      A “close call” or event that had the potential to
               result in an adverse event but did not [7]
Patient        Prevention of healthcare-associated harm caused by
safety         errors of commission and omission [10]
Root           A formal process of focused review that aims
cause          to identify a chain of events and wide variety of
analysis       contributory factors that lead up to an adverse event
               or near miss at the systems level [11, 12]


Adverse Events and Near Misses
Errors can lead to adverse events or near misses. An adverse
event is an unexpected and undesired incident that harms a
patient as a direct result of the care or services provided [7].
338   C. A. Liebert and S. M. Wren

In healthcare, the most common root cause of adverse events
is poor communication [13]. A near miss, or “close call,” is an
event that had the potential to result in an adverse event but
did not [7]. Near misses can occur when a potential or
impending error is identified and avoided. Alternatively, a
near miss can occur when a provider makes an error, but this
error is identified and corrected prior to harm to the patient
[1]. Near misses offer a critical opportunity for the providers
and healthcare system to perform a root cause analysis and
intervene before the error occurs again and leads to an
adverse event. Near misses may occur many times before an
actual harmful incident and typically outnumber adverse
events by a factor of more than 300 [14]. Taking advantage of
near misses has the real potential to improve patient safety
by analyzing error-prone situations or practices which can be
the basis of “error traps” waiting to catch other patients and
providers. In addition, there can be less anxiety about blame
since no one has been harmed. They serve as key opportuni-
ties for process improvement and prevention of future
adverse events.
   Surgical adverse events and near misses are frequently
used as metrics of quality care in healthcare systems and
national organizations such as the Joint Commission. Among
analysis of errors reported by surgeons at teaching hospitals,
66% were intraoperative errors, 27% preoperative, and 22%
postoperative [13]. The most common factors contributing to
errors in this study were inexperience/lack of competence in
a surgical task, communication breakdown, and ­         fatigue/
excessive workload [13]. Eighty-six percent of these adverse
events were identified to have cognitive factors contributing
to the error, such as error in judgment (63%) and failure of
vigilance (49%) [13].


Sentinel Events
Sentinel events are patient safety events which are not primar-
ily related to the patient’s underlying condition and result in
the death, permanent harm, or severe temporary harm of a
         Chapter 17. Classification and Analysis of Error   339

patient [9]. The reporting of most sentinel events by a hospi-
tal or healthcare system to the Joint Commission is voluntary
and therefore represents only a proportion of actual sentinel
events [9].


The Joint Commission Sentinel Events [9]

• Surgical
  –– Invasive procedure, including surgery, on the wrong
     patient, at the wrong site, or the wrong procedure
  –– Unintended retention of a foreign object in a patient
     after an invasive procedure or surgery
  –– Fire, flame, or unanticipated smoke, heat, or flashes
     occurring during an episode of patient care or
     procedure
• Nonsurgical
  –– Hemolytic transfusion reaction involving administra-
     tion of blood or blood products having major blood
     group incompatibilities
  –– Prolonged fluoroscopy with cumulative dose >1500
     rads to a single field or any delivery of radiotherapy to
     the wrong body region or >25% above the planned
     radiotherapy dose
  –– Severe neonatal hyperbilirubinemia (>30 mg/dL)
  –– Unanticipated death of a full-term infant
  –– Discharge of an infant to the wrong family
  –– Any intrapartum maternal death
  –– Severe maternal morbidity not primarily related to the
     natural course of the patient’s illness when it results in
     permanent harm or severe temporary harm
  –– Abduction of any patient receiving care, treatment, and
     services
  –– Elopement of a patient from staffed care setting leading
     to death, permanent harm, or severe temporary harm to
     the patient
  –– Rape, assault, or homicide of any patient receiving care,
     treatment, and services while on site at the hospital
340   C. A. Liebert and S. M. Wren

  –– Rape, assault, or homicide of a staff member, licensed
     independent practitioner, visitor, or vendor while on
     site at the hospital
  –– Suicide of any patient receiving care, treatment, and
     services in a staffed care setting or within 72 h of dis-
     charge from the hospital or emergency department


Surgical Never Events
Surgical never events represent a subset of sentinel events
causing serious harm to patients and include events such as
retained foreign bodies, wrong-site surgery, wrong-patient
surgery, and wrong-procedure surgery [5]. Of 9744 paid mal-
practice claims for surgical never events in the USA between
1990 and 2010, retained foreign body was the most common
(49.8%), followed by wrong procedure (25.1%), wrong-site
surgery (24.8%), and wrong-patient surgery (0.3%) [5]. In
multivariable logistic regression, surgeons with clinical privi-
lege disciplinary reports or state licensure disciplinary reports
were more likely to have surgical never events (adjusted
OR = 1.73, 95% CI, 1.47–2.03) [5]. Based on paid malpractice
claims, the estimated annual incidence of surgical never event
claims is 4082 in the USA each year [5]; however, the true
incidence is likely much higher as many do not reach the legal
process. Between 1990 and 2010, malpractice payments for
surgical never events totaled $1.3 billion [5].
   Based on data published by the Joint Commission, from
2012 to 2018, there were 700 reported retained foreign
objects (Fig. 17.1), with the most common retained objects
being surgical sponges, guidewires, and instruments [9, 15–17].
The three most frequent locations for retained sponges are
the abdomen/pelvis (50%), vagina (24%), and chest (9%)
[17]. In general surgery cases of retained sponges, sponge
counts were performed in 90% of cases, and 86% of those
counts were considered correct at the time of the count [17].
             Chapter 17. Classification and Analysis of Error                   341

                      Specimen 1%     Other 10%
                         (n = 6)       (n = 71)

            Implant 2%
              (n = 14)
                                                     Sponges 46%
        Packing 4%
                                                       (n = 319)
          (n = 30)

   Needle/blade 5%
       (n = 33)
                                                                   Sponges
                                                                   Guidewires
  Catheter/drain 7%
      (n = 52)                                                     Instrument
                                                                   Catheter/drain
                                                                   Needle/blade
                                                                   Packing
          Instrument 15%
              (n = 102)                                            Implant
                                                                   Specimen
                                    Guidewires 10%
                                                                   Other
                                        (n = 73)



Figure 17.1 Retained foreign objects reported to the Joint
Commission, 2012–2018. (Adapted from data reported by the Joint
Commission and Steelman et al. [9, 15–17])


Error Classification

Active and Latent Failures
Error is commonly classified as active versus latent failure.
Active failure is typically a human error that results from a
person’s inappropriate behavior and can be subclassified into
slips, lapses, and mistakes [7, 18]. Slips and lapses are errors of
execution, with slips defined as a failure to recognize informa-
tion that the individual would typically identify and lapses
defined as moments of attention loss [7]. In these types of
error, the provider’s intent was correct but due to the slip or
lapse, an error occurred. On the other hand, mistakes are
errors of intention or errors of planning, often due to incorrect
or inadequate plan [7]. In the case of mistakes, the correct
outcome will not occur even with good execution of the plan.
Mistakes can be subclassified into knowledge-based or rule-­
342   C. A. Liebert and S. M. Wren

based errors. Knowledge-based mistakes occur when a health-
care provider makes an error based on inadequate knowledge
or expertise, such as iatrogenic injury due to poor under-
standing of surgical anatomy [7]. Rule-based errors occur
when there is either misapplication or failure to apply a cor-
rect protocol [7]. Active failures can also be classified as
errors of commission, such as administration of an incorrect
medication or treatment, versus errors of omission, such as
failure to order an indicated treatment [1].
    Latent failures are healthcare system failures and can
lead to either error-prone situations or holes in the defense
against active failures [7]. These latent failures include
defensive gaps, weaknesses, or absences that can be uniden-
tified in a healthcare system for a significant period to time
before a combination of active failures exposes them [8].
Types of latent failures include preconditions for unsafe acts
such as fatigue, unsafe supervision of trainees, and failures
at the organizational level [18]. Examples of organizational
level failures include inadequate peer reviews, improper or
incomplete credentialing, failure to proactively review high-
risk processes for error, inappropriate staffing, and lack of
review of adverse events [18]. Poor communication can be
classified as a latent failure if it represents an organizational
culture that does not promote open and effective communi-
cation [18]. When identified and exposed, these latent fail-
ures can be addressed, corrected, and eliminated as sources
of error.


Types of Errors

One method of classification proposed by Leape et al. orga-
nizes errors by diagnosis, treatment, and prevention [2]:
• Diagnostic
  –– Error or delay in diagnosis
  –– Failure to employ indicated tests
  –– Use of outmoded tests or therapy
  –– Failure to act on results of monitoring or testing
         Chapter 17. Classification and Analysis of Error   343

• Treatment
  –– Error in the performance of an operation, procedure, or
     test
  –– Error in administering the treatment
  –– Error in the dose or method of using a drug
  –– Avoidable delay in treatment or in responding to an
     abnormal test
  –– Inappropriate (not indicated) care
• Preventative
  –– Failure to provide prophylactic treatment
  –– Inadequate monitoring or follow-up of treatment
• Other
  –– Failure of communication
  –– Equipment failure
  –– Other system failure


Error-Catalyzing Factors
Multiple factors have been identified that can catalyze error
in medicine [10]. These catalyzing or contributing factors can
be divided into organization- or team-related factors,
individual-­ related factors, and patient-related factors [10].
Examples of organization- or team-related factors include
unhealthy patient safety culture, poor communication sys-
tems, inadequate resources, system inefficiencies, failure to
promote informed shared decision-making, and failure to
seek an independent opinion when warranted [10]. Individual-­
related factors can include knowledge deficits, technical skill
deficits, inexperience, poor communication skills, haste, work
overload, cognitive biases, cognitive overload, fatigue, and
distractions [10]. Patient-related factors include language bar-
riers, compliance, and biases of systems related to a patient’s
age, gender, race, or socioeconomic status [10]. Although one
factor may play a primary role in medical error, most com-
monly multiple factors coexist.
344    C. A. Liebert and S. M. Wren

The Swiss Cheese Model
To a certain degree, slips, lapses, and mistakes by providers
are inevitable in every healthcare system. Adverse events are
more likely to occur when both active and latent failures
coexist or when multiple latent conditions occur simultane-
ously, which is referred to as the Swiss cheese model of sys-
tem accidents [8]. In this model, first described by British
psychologist James Reason, a systems approach is taken with
the premise that humans are fallible and that errors are con-
sequences of systemic factors such as recurrent error traps
and flawed organizational processes [8]. This model describes
multiple layers of defenses in a healthcare system (slices of
cheese) which are safeguards to block errors. Ideally, each of
these layers of defense would remain intact, but in reality
there are defects in these processes (holes in the cheese) that
are continually opening, shutting, and shifting their location
[8]. If an error were to occur, a “hole” in any single layer of
defense would not normally lead to patient harm. However,
when multiple holes in layers of defense momentarily align,
errors can lead to patient harm. In the Swiss cheese model of
error, holes in defenses typically arise due to a combination
of both active failures and latent failures [8]. Thus, it is impera-
tive that organizational leaders identify and address latent
failures in the healthcare system in order to prevent, protect,
and mitigate against the effects of active failures. By examin-
ing near misses and adverse events using the Swiss cheese
model, we can attempt to understand why the error occurred
and identify methods to correct these holes.
   Stein and Heiss built upon Reason’s Swiss cheese model by
further defining each layer of defense. In their model
(Fig. 17.2), the layers of defense, or “slices,” include education,
training, institutional policies and procedures, technology,
communication, and checklists. Training can include prior
experience, simulation, didactic exercises, and ongoing expo-
sure [18]. Institutional policies and procedures can be
organization-­specific or nationally accepted and are designed
to promote safe, standardized care [18]. Examples of technol-
                   Chapter 17. Classification and Analysis of Error                                               345

     Incorrect site
     on consent
                             Education




                                                                          Ea er
                                         Training




                                                                            ch ror
                                                                            to
   First day at




                                                                               sl pr
                                                                                 ic op
   the new




                                                                                   e
                                                                                     of og
   hospital




                                                                                       ch atio
                   New




                                                                                         ee n
                                                       Policies




                                                                                           se
                   equipment




                                                                                              is
                   never




                                                                                              a
                   inserviced




                                                                                               ba
                                                                                                 rr
                                                                   Technology




                                                                                                   ie
                              Band used




                                                                                                     r
                              instead of
                              marking
Ho e ba




                                                                              Communication
 th
  les rrie




                                   Video transIation
     re rs




                                   down had to use
        pr




                                   phone                                                 Checklists
          es
             se
             nt




                                              Family does not
                  fai




                                              speak english
                   lur
                      es




                                                                                                         Adverse event-
                         i




                                                                  H and P not
                        n




                                                                                                         wrong site
                                                                  verified with                          surgery
                                                                  consent


Figure 17.2 Swiss cheese model of adverse events. (Visual model
portraying the adverse event of wrong-site surgery in a child with
right inguinal hernia using a modified Swiss cheese model. Figure
originally published in Stein and Heiss, Seminars in Pediatric
Surgery, 2015 [18]. Reproduced with permission from Elsevier)


ogy can include electronic medical record pop-ups or best
practice alerts, which are vulnerable to alert fatigue [18].
Checklists provide a layer of defense by ensuring confirma-
tion of critical patient information and structured surgical
briefings, debriefings, and handoffs [18].


Error Analysis
At the basis of error analysis is the concept that error is not
the conclusion but rather the starting point of an investiga-
tion [7]. Learning from adverse events and near misses is a
cornerstone of patient safety and improvement. There are
several methods for investigation and analysis of medical
errors, including clinical case review at forums (such as mor-
bidity and mortality conference or peer review), contributory
346   C. A. Liebert and S. M. Wren

factors, root cause analysis (RCA), failure mode and effects
analysis (FMEA), and fishbone diagrams.


Contributory Factors

One method for analyzing medical errors builds off the work
of James Reason and classifies error-producing conditions
and organizational factors in a single broad framework [19].
This model requires that the user starts by examining the
series of events leading to the adverse event or near miss and
then further investigates the conditions and organizational
context in which the incident occurred [19]. Table 17.2 outlines
this framework with examples of common contributory fac-
tors to errors.


Table 17.2 Framework of factors influencing clinical practice and
contributing to adverse events
                  Contributory       Examples of problems
Framework         factors            that contribute to errors
Institutional     Regulatory context Insufficient priority
                  Medicolegal        given by regulators
                  environment        to safety issues; legal
                                     pressures against open
                                     discussion, preventing the
                                     opportunity to learn from
                                     adverse events
Organizational   Financial resources   Lack of awareness of
and              and constraints       safety issues on the part
management       Policy standards      of senior management;
                 and goals             policies leading to
                 Safety culture and    inadequate staffing levels
                 priorities
          Chapter 17. Classification and Analysis of Error        347

Table 17.2 (continued)
                 Contributory            Examples of problems
Framework        factors                 that contribute to errors
Work             Staffing levels and     Heavy workloads, leading
environment      mix of skills           to fatigue; limited access
                 Patterns in             to essential equipment;
                 workload and shift      inadequate administrative
                 Design, availability,   support, leading to
                 and maintenance         reduced time with
                 of equipment            patients
                 Administrative and
                 managerial support
Team             Verbal                  Poor supervision of junior
                 communication           staff; poor communication
                 Written                 among different
                 communication           professions; unwillingness
                 Supervision and         of junior staff to seek
                 willingness to seek     assistance
                 help
                 Team leadership
Individual staff Knowledge and           Lack of knowledge or
member           skills                  experience; long-term
                 Motivation and          fatigue and stress
                 attitude
                 Physical and
                 mental health
Task             Availability and        Unavailability of test
                 use of protocols        results or delay in
                 Availability and        obtaining them; lack
                 accuracy of test        of clear protocols and
                 results                 guidelines
Patient          Complexity and          Distress; language
                 seriousness of          barriers between patients
                 condition               and caregivers
                 Language and
                 communication
                 Personality and
                 social factors
Adapted from Vincent et al. NEJM 2003 [11]
348   C. A. Liebert and S. M. Wren

Root Cause Analysis (RCA)

Root cause analysis, also called systems analysis, is a formal
process of focused review that aims to identify a chain of
events and wide variety of contributory factors that lead up
to an adverse event or near miss at the systems level [11, 12].
The objective of this analysis is to reveal gaps and inadequa-
cies in the healthcare system which can then be addressed in
order to prevent future events. Root cause analysis is an
event analysis tool that can be applied retrospectively to
identify and understand what happened, why it happened,
and what should be done to correct it [7]. In comparison with
traditional clinical case review, it follows a predefined proto-
col for identifying specific contributing factors [7]. A formal
root cause analysis is typically conducted by an interdisciplin-
ary team of four to five individuals [12]. Five goals of root
cause analysis are (1) to determine human and other factors
involved in critical incidents, (2) to determine related pro-
cesses and systems, (3) to analyze underlying causes and
effect systems through a series of “why” questions, (4) to
identify possible risks and their potential contributions, and
(5) to determine a potential improvement in processes and
systems [7]. When identifying root causes (RC) and contribut-
ing factors (CF), each human error should have an identified
preceding cause and statements should include both cause
and effect [12]. A root cause analysis of surgical never events
submitted to the Joint Commission between 2004 and 2010
cited lack of leadership and communication as the most com-
mon causes of wrong-site surgery and retained foreign bodies.
Figure 17.3 outlines common steps in the root cause analysis
process.
   The Institute for Healthcare Improvement has proposed a
modified root cause analysis termed “root cause analysis and
actions” or RCA2 [20]. This process utilizes the basic frame-
work of a root cause analysis with emphasis on a standard-
ized process, action, risk-based prioritization, and
understanding that multiple causes usually contribute to an
adverse event [20]. RCA2 focuses on the identification and
            Chapter 17. Classification and Analysis of Error                                          349

      • Establish preliminary sequence of events: Acquisition of an initial understanding of the
  1     problem based on facts known in time


      • Identify and fill information gaps: Gathering of additional information relevant to the critical
  2     incident via chart review and/or interviews


      • Perform literature review: Literature review or review of past experience
  3

      • Create final version of sequence of events: Establishment of a detailed picture or “final flow
  4     diagram” of a sequence and interaction of human and system factors leading to the incident


      • Identify root causes and contributing factors: Determination of contributing factors (CF) and
  5     root causes (RC) and formation of causal statements


      • Review similar events: Identification of additional findings, relevant to patient safety, such as
  6     root cause analysis from similar events in the past


      • Develop action plan: Development of actions to correct the problem and propose ways to
  7     prevent its occurence in the future


      • Implement: Implementation of the action plan
  8


      • Evaluate: Measurement and evaluation of the effectiveness of actions
  9

      • Communicate results and disseminate: Sharing results of improvement within the health care
 10     system




Figure 17.3 Steps of root cause analysis (RCA). (Steps adapted
from Medical Error and Harm: Understanding, Prevention, and
Control by Milos Jenicek and VA National Center for Patient Safety
Root Cause Analysis (RCA) Step-By-Step Guide [7, 12])

implementation of sustainable systems-based improvements
to make patient care safer [20].


Failure Mode and Effects Analysis (FMEA)

Failure mode error analysis is a team-based, systematic tech-
nique used to prospectively identify potential vulnerabilities
or failure points in high-risk systems prior to the occurrence
of an adverse event [18, 21]. This process was initially devel-
oped in the aerospace and nuclear power industries but is
increasingly being applied in healthcare systems. The five
350        C. A. Liebert and S. M. Wren

primary steps of FMEA are (1) create a flow diagram of the
process under evaluation to identify its component steps, (2)
identify potential errors or failure modes at each step, (3)
score the failure modes numerically to prioritize them
according to the risk they pose, (4) identify possible causes
for the failures, and (5) generate corrective actions to address
these failures [21]. The process of FMEA has been recom-
mended by several national organizations, including the
Institute for Safe Medication Practices, the Joint Commission
on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations, and the
National Patient Safety Agency in the UK [21].


Fishbone Diagram

A fishbone diagram (Fig. 17.4), also referred to as a cause-­
and-­effect diagram or Ishikawa diagram, is a cause analysis


                               Cause                                           Effect

  Delay in diagnosis      Delay in escalation    Patient factors




                                                                           Adverse event/
                                                                            medical error




      Technical factors    Communication        Systems/protocol factors



Figure 17.4 Fishbone diagram. Example of fishbone diagram to
represent contributing factors and causes of an adverse event
         Chapter 17. Classification and Analysis of Error   351

tool that can be used to analyze adverse events [22]. These
can easily be adapted into morbidity and mortality confer-
ence discussions and help educate all attendees and trainees
in error analysis and to start thinking broadly about factors
that contribute to adverse events.


Prevention of Error in Surgery
Strategies to reduce medical errors in a healthcare system
should aim to reduce the frequency of errors by taking
human limitations into account, make errors more visible
when they occur so their impacts can be mitigated, and pro-
vide remedies to rescue patients when errors have occurred
[23]. The Joint Commission has created annual National
Patient Safety Goals, which inform their sentinel event alerts,
standards and survey processes, performance measures, and
Joint Commission Center for Transforming Healthcare proj-
ects [24]. Additionally, the National Quality Forum has devel-
oped safe practice recommendations to prevent never events
(Fig. 17.5) [5].
   Checklists, such as the World Health Organization Surgical
Safety Checklist (WHO SSC) and Surgical Patient Safety
System (SURPASS), can improve patient outcomes in sur-
gery and reduce error [26]. A nonrandomized clinical trial has
demonstrated that adherence to the postoperative SURPASS
checklist is associated with decreased readmission and adher-
ence to both the WHO SSC and preoperative SURPASS
checklists is associated with reduced surgical complications
and need for reoperation [26].
352    C. A. Liebert and S. M. Wren

Figure 17.5
National Patient
Safety Foundation
recommendations
for achieving total
systems safety.
(Adapted from:
National Patient
Safety Foundation.
Free from Harm:
Accelerating Patient
Safety Improvement
Fifteen Years after To
Err Is Human.
Boston, MA:
National Patient
Safety Foundation;
2015. Available at
ihi.org [25])
          Chapter 17. Classification and Analysis of Error        353

Summary
In all healthcare systems, human error is inevitable. While it
is not possible to eliminate medical error completely, strate-
gies can be put in place to design safer healthcare systems to
reduce error and mitigate its consequences [23]. Even appar-
ently single error events are typically due to a convergence of
multiple contributing factors or latent failures, and preven-
tion requires a systems approach to correct the conditions
that contributed to the errors [1].
   Errors in healthcare can be classified as near misses and
adverse events and can be divided into active failures, such as
slips, lapses, and mistakes, or latent failures, such as defensive
gaps or weaknesses. Multiple latent failures within a health-
care system increase the likelihood that human error will
result in an adverse patient event, as illustrated by the Swiss
cheese model. Latent conditions present an opportunity to
identify and proactively correct systems-based failures or
weaknesses prior to the occurrence of an adverse event.
Error and adverse event reporting is key to prompt identifi-
cation and correction of latent failures. Root cause analysis is
a key strategy in the accurate identification of error and
modification of latent conditions to prevent future
occurrences.


References
 1. Institute of Medicine (US) Committee on Quality of Health
    Care in America. In: Kohn LT, Corrigan JM, Donaldson MS,
    editors. To err is human: building a safer health system. National
    Academies Press (US); 2000. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
    books/NBK225182/. Accessed 11 Nov 2020.
 2. Leape LL, Lawthers AG, Brennan TA, Johnson WG. Preventing
    medical injury. QRB Qual Rev Bull. 1993;19(5):144–9. https://
    doi.org/10.1016/s0097-­5990(16)30608-­x.
 3. Michaels RK, Makary MA, Dahab Y, et al. Achieving the
    National Quality Forum’s “never events”: prevention of
    wrong site, wrong procedure, and wrong patient operations.
354      C. A. Liebert and S. M. Wren

      Ann Surg. 2007;245(4):526–32. https://doi.org/10.1097/01.
      sla.0000251573.52463.d2.
 4.   NQF: Serious Reportable Events. http://www.qualityforum.org/
      topics/sres/serious_reportable_events.aspx. Accessed 1 Dec 2020
 5.   Mehtsun WT, Ibrahim AM, Diener-West M, Pronovost PJ,
      Makary MA. Surgical never events in the United States. Surgery.
      2013;153(4):465–72. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.surg.2012.10.005.
 6.   Leape LL. Error in medicine. JAMA. 1994;272(23):1851–7.
 7.   Jenicek M. Medical error and harm: understanding, pre-
      vention, and control. Productivity Press; 2010. https://doi.
      org/10.1201/9781439836958.
 8.   Reason J. Human error: models and management. BMJ.
      2000;320(7237):768–70. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.320.7237.768.
 9.   Sentinel event data - event type by year. https://www.joint-
      commission.org/resources/patient-­safety-­topics/sentinel-­event/
      Sentinel. Event Data - Event Type by Year. Accessed 27 Nov
      2020.
10.   Seshia SS, Bryan Young G, Makhinson M, Smith PA, Stobart
      K, Croskerry P. Gating the holes in the Swiss cheese (part I):
      expanding professor Reason’s model for patient safety. J Eval
      Clin Pract. 2018;24(1):187–97. https://doi.org/10.1111/jep.12847.
11.   Vincent C. Understanding and responding to adverse events.
      N Engl J Med. 2003;348(11):1051–6. https://doi.org/10.1056/
      NEJMhpr020760.
12.   Root Cause Analysis. VA National Center for Patient Safety.
      https://www.patientsafety.va.gov/media/rca.asp. Accessed 14 Nov
      2020.
13.   Gawande AA, Zinner MJ, Studdert DM, Brennan TA. Analysis of
      errors reported by surgeons at three teaching hospitals. Surgery.
      2003;133(6):614–21. https://doi.org/10.1067/msy.2003.169.
14.   Cuschieri A. Nature of human error. Ann Surg. 2006;244(5):642–
      8. https://doi.org/10.1097/01.sla.0000243601.36582.18.
15.   Steelman VM, Shaw C, Shine L, Hardy-Fairbanks
      AJ. Unintentionally retained foreign objects: a descriptive
      study of 308 sentinel events and contributing factors. Jt Comm
      J Qual Patient Saf. 2019;45(4):249–58. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
      jcjq.2018.09.001.
16.   Steelman VM, Thenuwara K, Shaw C, Shine L. Unintentionally
      retained guidewires: a descriptive study of 73 sentinel events.
      Jt Comm J Qual Patient Saf. 2019;45(2):81–90. https://doi.
      org/10.1016/j.jcjq.2018.08.003.
          Chapter 17. Classification and Analysis of Error       355

17. Steelman VM, Shaw C, Shine L, Hardy-Fairbanks AJ. Retained
    surgical sponges: a descriptive study of 319 occurrences and con-
    tributing factors from 2012 to 2017. Patient Saf Surg. 2018;12:20.
    https://doi.org/10.1186/s13037-­0 18-­0 166-­0.
18. Stein JE, Heiss K. The Swiss cheese model of adverse event occur-
    rence--closing the holes. Semin Pediatr Surg. 2015;24(6):278–82.
    https://doi.org/10.1053/j.sempedsurg.2015.08.003.
19. Vincent C, Taylor-Adams S, Chapman EJ, et al. How to inves-
    tigate and analyse clinical incidents: clinical risk unit and
    association of litigation and risk management protocol. BMJ.
    2000;320(7237):777–81. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.320.7237.777.
20. RCA2: improving root cause analyses and actions to prevent
    harm. Institute for Healthcare Improvement (IHI). http://www.
    ihi.org:80/resources/Pages/Tools/RCA2-­Improving-­Root-­Cause-­
    Analyses-­and-­Actions-­to-­Prevent-­Harm.aspx. Accessed 27 Nov
    2020.
21. Ashley L, Armitage G. Failure mode and effects analysis:
    an empirical comparison of failure mode scoring proce-
    dures. J Patient Saf. 2010;6(4):210–5. https://doi.org/10.1097/
    pts.0b013e3181fc98d7.
22. Quality toolbox (2nd ed.) - Knovel. https://app-­knovel-­com.
    laneproxy.stanford.edu/web/toc.v/cid:kpQTE00001. Accessed 27
    Nov 2020.
23. Makary MA, Daniel M. Medical error-the third leading cause
    of death in the US. BMJ. 2016;353:i2139. https://doi.org/10.1136/
    bmj.i2139.
24. National Patient Safety Goals. https://www.jointcommission.org/
    standards/national-­patient-­safety-­goals. Accessed 27 Nov 2020.
25. Free from harm: accelerating patient safety improvement fifteen
    years after to err is human. Institute for Healthcare Improvement
    (IHI). http://www.ihi.org:80/resources/Pages/Publications/Free-­
    from-­H arm-­Accelerating-­Patient-­S afety-­I mprovement.aspx.
    Accessed 27 Nov 2020.
26. Storesund A, Haugen AS, Flaatten H, et al. Clinical efficacy of
    combined surgical patient safety system and the world health
    organization’s checklists in surgery: a nonrandomized clinical
    trial. JAMA Surg. 2020;155(7):562–70. https://doi.org/10.1001/
    jamasurg.2020.0989.
Chapter 18
Disclosure
of Complications
and Error
Rocco Orlando III and Stephanie Calcasola




Communication with patients about medical error is one of
the most difficult issues that confront surgeons. While sur-
geons strive to care for patients without mistakes, the com-
plexity of the care process allows for the possibility of
surgeon error, system error, or error committed by any mem-
ber of the care team. Most errors are the result of human
rather than technical failures [1]. The current movement to
enhance patient safety and improve healthcare quality will
certainly reduce error with the goal of error-free care. The
introduction of high reliability principles has resulted in dra-
matic reductions in preventable harm when diligently imple-
mented in a hospital or healthcare system [2]. Human



R. Orlando III (*)
Hartford HealthCare, Hartford, CT, USA
University of Connecticut School of Medicine, Hartford, CT, USA
e-mail: rocco.orlando@hhchealth.org
S. Calcasola
Hartford HealthCare, Hartford, CT, USA
e-mail: Stephanie.calcasola@hhchealth.org

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature   357
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_18
358   R. Orlando III and S. Calcasola

fallibility can be limited by robust systems, yet medical error
will unfortunately continue to occur and will never be com-
pletely eliminated.
   In the eyes of the patient and family, there may be confu-
sion between an understanding of complications and error.
While adverse events may occur as the result of the underly-
ing disease or unavoidable consequences of a surgical inter-
vention, it is important to be truthful and transparent in
discussing these events with patients, families, and members
of the care team. While the discussion in this chapter is
focused on error, the underlying principles apply equally to
disclosure and complications. At times, it may not be clear
initially whether or not the source of a poor outcome is the
result of medical error or an unavoidable complication. In
those cases, diligent evaluation and use of the process of root
cause analysis will usually clarify the cause of the adverse
event.
   The definition of error that was adopted by the Institute
of Medicine in the seminal report To Err Is Human [3] was
proposed by James Reason in 1990: “occasions in which a
planned sequence of mental or physical activities fails to
achieve its intended outcome” [4]. This definition includes
errors that may not result in an adverse event, the concept
of the “near miss.” The Harvard Medical Practice Study
defined adverse events as “an injury that was caused by
medical management (and not the disease process) that
either prolonged the hospitalization or produced a disability
at the time of discharge or both” [5]. This definition is not
only precise but also includes significant errors which might
not result in disability or prolonged hospital stay. These
errors may not result in an adverse event but can still be
troubling to patients or the healthcare team. The rise of the
high reliability movement in healthcare has emphasized the
analysis of near misses – errors that do not result in patient
harm but provide the opportunity to improve process and
avoid future harm.
       Chapter 18.    Disclosure of Complications and Error     359

Toward a Taxonomy of Error
The traditional taxonomy of error employed by most sur-
geons is the model of the morbidity and mortality conference.
This approach recognizes the time-honored concepts of tech-
nical error, judgment error, error of omission, and error of
commission [5]. The morbidity and mortality conference
analyzes all adverse events on a surgical service – deaths and
complications – and the formal structure recognizes that
while some adverse events are preventable, others are not.
This taxonomy of error is incomplete because it is unduly
focused on the actions of the surgeon. While the surgeon may,
indeed, commit a technical error or make an error in judg-
ment (such as a delay in diagnosis), this approach does not
recognize the myriad of other kinds of medical error: cogni-
tive errors, medication errors, nursing care errors, system
errors, and latent errors. Latent error refers to the injury
which can result from a complex chain of events in the care
process – any one of the events might not result in injury, but
taken together, an adverse event occurs. A more inclusive
categorization of error is useful because it may provide guid-
ance in changing systems of care to prevent future error
(Table 18.1).
   Reason’s definition of error is more broad and helpful as
surgeons consider what to disclose to patients when errors
occur. From a pragmatic and ethical standpoint, any error

Table 18.1 Taxonomy of error
Traditional surgical paradigm     Practical taxonomy of error
Technical error                   Cognitive error
Judgment error                    Technical error
Delay in diagnosis                System error
Error in diagnosis                Latent error
Error of omission                 Medication error
Error of commission               Device failure
360   R. Orlando III and S. Calcasola

which reaches the threshold of the Harvard Medical Practice
Study, resulting in prolonged hospital stay, death, or disability,
must be reported to the patient. However, errors recognized
by Reason must also be reported at times, specifically those
which do not result in injury but may come to the patient’s
attention. These errors, the “near misses,” must be discussed
with the patient to avoid a loss in confidence in the caregivers.
It is important to explain to patients and families that health-
care systems analyze near misses – looking for opportunities
to make care safer and to engender more trust in physicians
and hospitals.


Regulatory Aspects of Error Disclosure
The climate of healthcare now requires that errors be dis-
closed. This has resulted from the patient safety movement
and recognition that transparency and public accountability
are essential to maintaining trust in healthcare. In the past,
the culture of medicine was to withhold admission of errors.
Physicians commonly withheld the disclosure of errors from
patients. Errors were only disclosed when the mistake was
obvious or significant injury resulted. At times, adverse
events were ascribed to the patient’s disease rather than to
error. The prevailing wisdom was that admission of error
would increase the risk of malpractice litigation. Physicians
were embarrassed and unsure of disclosure strategies when
confronting error. Patients now expect to be fully informed
and involved in their care.
   The momentum for the disclosure of error has developed
as a result of the patient safety and quality movement. In the
USA, the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare
Organizations (the Joint Commission) issued the first nation-
wide disclosure standard in 2001 [7]. This standard requires
that patients be informed about all outcomes of care includ-
ing “unanticipated outcomes.” The importance of the Joint
Commission in the realm of hospital care gave great impetus
to the movement to disclose errors. The National Quality
      Chapter 18.   Disclosure of Complications and Error      361

Forum (NQF), an organization that operates at the federal
level with strong ties to CMS, has developed standards for the
disclosure of unanticipated outcomes [8]. The NQF safe prac-
tice standards are used by the Leapfrog Group, a coalition of
29 large healthcare purchasing organizations. A total of 1300
hospitals currently report information about these standards,
including disclosure, to the Leapfrog Group.
     The Institute for Healthcare Improvement, the Agency for
Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ), and numerous
medical specialty societies have all called for policies of dis-
closure. AHRQ has published guidelines for the disclosure of
error most recently updated in 2019 [9]. Medical society rec-
ommendations for transparent disclosure of error have
become quite specific in calling for open discussion and dis-
closure when errors occur. The AMA Code of Ethics had
been vague in the past but was updated in 2016. It now rec-
ommends not only that physicians be forthcoming when they
make an error but also recommends that they encourage
colleagues to disclose when they are aware of the error of
another physician [10, 11].
     Internationally, initiatives in Australia and the UK have
been notable. In 2003, Australia initiated an “Open Disclosure
Standard” in pilot programs across the country. In the UK,
the “Being Open” initiative has been put in place with an
extensive educational campaign. These programs have advo-
cated transparent communication and provided tools for
enhancing communication with patients. They have been
voluntary and have not specifically addressed poor outcomes
which have occurred as a result of medical error [10].
     As the regulatory agencies have established standards for
the disclosure of error, governmental authorities are begin-
ning to mandate disclosure. Although there are no laws
requiring disclosure at the national level, in 2005, then
Senators Hillary Rodham Clinton and Barack Obama
­sponsored a bill, the National Medical Error Disclosure and
 Compensation Act (MEDiC), calling for full disclosure of
 errors [8]. The bill did not pass, but it linked disclosure, qual-
 ity, and the medical liability system. The recognition at the
362   R. Orlando III and S. Calcasola

federal level that issues of quality, openness, and liability are
all closely related is important, yet from a regulatory perspec-
tive, these initiatives are more likely to be implemented at the
state rather than federal level.
    Several states have passed legislation mandating disclo-
sure of serious unanticipated outcomes. Laws are now in
effect in ten states including Nevada, Florida, New Jersey,
Pennsylvania, Oregon, Vermont, and California [10]. The
most stringent law is in place in Pennsylvania which requires
that hospitals notify patients in writing within 7 days of a seri-
ous event. The Pennsylvania law also prohibits the use of
these communications as evidence of liability. These laws
share a common approach which requires that hospitals
develop mechanisms for disclosure, rather than individual
physicians. Forty-five states have enacted “apology laws”
which protect certain information transmitted in disclosures,
especially expressions of regret or other forms of apology
[10]. Enforcement of these laws is only stipulated in the
Pennsylvania law. Many of the laws are sufficiently vague that
regulation of disclosures seems difficult, at best. Nonetheless,
they represent progress because apologies are not admissible
in court as part of a malpractice action in most of these states.


Error Disclosure and Risk of Litigation
Physicians have been most concerned that disclosure will
increase the likelihood of a malpractice action. These con-
cerns have done much to impede the flow of information to
patients and families. Despite this, it is now clear that patients
want to know about all errors that cause them harm. A large
survey of emergency department patients revealed that 80%
wanted to be informed immediately of any medical error. A
large majority also supported reporting errors to government
agencies, state medical boards, and hospital committees [13].
This study also demonstrated that patients wished to be
      Chapter 18.   Disclosure of Complications and Error    363

informed not just about error resulting in injury but also
about “near misses.” A large survey of health plan members
reported increased patient satisfaction and trust when pre-
sented scenarios in which full disclosure was advocated. The
study also indicated that patients felt that they would be less
likely to seek legal advice with full disclosure [14].
   American and Canadian physicians appear to embrace the
soundness of disclosing errors. These attitudes have changed
significantly during the last 20 years. In a 1991 survey of
house officers, three out of four said that they had not
reported an error to a patient, largely because of concern
about litigation [15]. By 2006, in a survey of 2637 physicians,
98% supported disclosing serious medical errors to patients.
Seventy-four percent thought that disclosing errors would be
difficult, and 58% actually reported disclosing a serious error.
Physicians who supported disclosing errors were more likely
to believe that disclosure made patients less likely to sue [16].
Physicians were more likely than hospital risk managers to
support providing a full apology for error, while the risk man-
agers were more likely to support disclosing error in the first
place [17].
   The relationship between disclosure and risk of litigation
is not at all clear. In 1987, the Veterans Affairs Hospital in
Lexington, Kentucky, introduced a disclosure program years
before any other. An analysis of the results in 1999 showed
that the number of claims during the 12-year period increased,
but payments made decreased [18]. Nonetheless, there is a
paucity of data which relates the likelihood of a lawsuit to a
policy of complete disclosure of error. Despite the lack of
solid data, most experts believe that disclosure of error and
apology likely reduces the risk of litigation. Based upon the
University of Michigan experience, Boothman and Campbell
et al. have demonstrated that forthright disclosure and a will-
ingness to apologize are associated with a reduced risk of
malpractice actions [19]. In 2014, Mello et al. summarized the
outcomes in several states with the same finding [20].
364   R. Orlando III and S. Calcasola

 ommunication and Resolution Programs
C
(CRPs)
Boothman’s work in Michigan along with the work at the
Veterans administration led to the establishment of formal
programs to facilitate disclosure and early resolution. One of
the most important adverse consequences of the tort system
is that even in cases where medically induced harm occurs,
these cases have often resulted in greater impact to a patient
or family that must wait years for financial restitution. To
promote communication and patient safety with patients
after medical error, healthcare leaders and organizations
have developed and implemented formal communication
and resolution programs (CRPs) [18, 22–24]. The intent of
CRPs is to ensure that patients and families injured by medi-
cal error receive prompt “authentic” communication and
disclosure of the error. In addition, CRPs are guided by a
principled and comprehensive approach with the patient and
family engaged throughout the process [18, 22, 24, 25].
Gallagher and team have identified a key success factor for
CRPs: the commitment of the healthcare organization to
“ensure that patients and families injured by medical care
receive prompt attention, honest and empathic explanations,
and sincere expressions of reconciliation including financial
and non-financial restitution” [25].
   The early successes (reduced rate of claims, lawsuits, liabil-
ity costs, and shorter times to resolution) from the University
of Michigan Health System “Early Disclosure and Offer
Program” and the Lexington, Kentucky, Veterans Affairs
Hospital’s program [18, 24, 26] provided the path for others to
model [18, 24, 25, 27]. Although interest and momentum are
increasing for healthcare organizations to adopt CRPs, there
have been challenges with replicating the success of the ear-
lier programs [28–31]. More than 200 hospitals have imple-
mented CRPs [26]. CRPs require a shift in mindset and
culture where transparency and engaging patients proactively
are the hallmarks of the program. This is in contrast to the
traditional “deny and defend” models [18]. Moore and
      Chapter 18.   Disclosure of Complications and Error   365

c­ olleagues explored the experiences of patients and families
 who were injured by medical error and who participated in a
 CRP program [33]. The CRP experience was positive overall
 for 60% of the participants. Satisfaction was highest when
 patients and families reported the communications to be
 “empathetic and not adversarial.” Additionally, patients
 reported “a strong need to be heard and expected the attend-
 ing physician to listen without interrupting during the con-
 versations about the event” [33]. Central to all CRPs is the
 active engagement of the patient and family in the process.
 Engaging the patient as soon as possible after a medical error
 is foundational to the program [18, 22–25, 27–30].
     Healthcare organizations that have implemented CRPs
have been able to improve patient safety across the organiza-
tions as a result of implementing the CRP. Mello and col-
leagues reported the CRP program process gave opportunity
to not only identify the patient safety opportunity but actu-
ally deploy system changes to improve care design. Some of
these best practices include sharing findings with staff to
promote transparency, reeducation, policy change, safety
alerts, and human factors engineering to name a few [28, 29].
Elements of a principled CRP process start with communica-
tion with the patients when the medical error occurs, concur-
rent investigation to understand why, communicating findings
and apologizing, and closing the loop by implementing mea-
sures to avoid reoccurrences of the error [34]. Resources are
available to guide healthcare leaders in implementing CRPs
[23, 29, 34]. In 2017, the Agency for Research and Quality
published the CANDOR toolkit (Communication and
Optimal Resolution) to aid healthcare organizations in
implementing CRPs.


Strategies for Disclosing Error to Patients
Gallagher and his colleagues have observed that surgeons are
more inclined to disclose error than their medical colleagues
[19]. This may result in part from the fact that surgical errors
are often more clear and unambiguous. They documented
366   R. Orlando III and S. Calcasola

better ability of surgeons to disclose error using a standard-
ized set of patient scenarios [19]. Surgeons are probably bet-
ter at disclosing error because of their greater familiarity with
transmitting information about complications. Surgeons tend
to be direct in describing adverse events and are good at pro-
viding details about the consequences of medical error.
However, surgeons are reluctant to state that an adverse
event was a “mistake” or “error” [19]. Although surgeons may
be better than their colleagues in other specialties, until
recently there was very little guidance about how to commu-
nicate error. The lack of guidance contributes to the tendency
of surgeons to avoid the use of the word error or mistake.
   When an error occurs, it is necessary to disclose it forth-
rightly to the patient. The first decision centers on who should
be present when the error is disclosed. This should be dis-
cussed prior to meeting with the patient and family. Often,
other members of the team should be present to fully address
the patient’s needs – this may include nursing, hospital
administration, risk management, or other physicians. It is
often advisable to have a trusted senior surgeon present.
When a severe complication or death has occurred, the sur-
geon may have concerns that arise from guilt or emotional
distress as a result of the poor outcome. The voice of a senior
surgeon who does not feel responsible for the complication
and who has participated in this kind of meeting in the past
may be very helpful. The meeting should take place in a pri-
vate setting and all participants should be introduced. The
conversation with the patient should take place using clear,
simple language, and the tone should be calm and empathic.
   The surgeon must provide all of the facts about the event.
The source of the error must be identified, paying particular
attention to whether it is a technical error, human error, or
system failure. It is entirely appropriate to express regret for
the adverse outcome and to offer a formal apology if the
outcome is the result of system failure or error. These conver-
sations should be carried out with empathy and sensitivity. It
is very important to accept responsibility for the adverse
outcome and to avoid the use of the passive voice. During
these conversations, it is important to not attribute blame to
      Chapter 18.   Disclosure of Complications and Error    367

others or to claim a lack of understanding of the events. In
many cases, all of the facts are not known at the time of initial
disclosure. In those cases, the surgeon and team should com-
mit to letting the patient and family know the results of the
hospital investigation and analysis. There should be a timely
follow-up in in fully informing the patient and family about
the outcome of the investigation. Delay in having these dis-
cussions can engender a further breakdown in trust.
   Following a discussion of the error and resulting injury, the
surgeon should review its implications with the patient. The
consequences of the error should be reviewed, and the sur-
geon should explain what will be done to mitigate the prob-
lem. The emotional needs of the patient and family should be
remembered at this time, and any necessary support should
be offered. The patient should also be told what measures will
be taken to ensure that a similar error does not occur in the
future to another patient.
   From an institutional standpoint, the disclosure should be
part of a response which includes patient safety and risk man-
agement activities – ensuring that a similar event does not
occur again and that system problems are addressed. Coaching
of physicians in appropriate communication strategies should
be available. Organizations that have formal CRP programs
conduct training of physicians in the best approaches to com-
munication. Organizations with CRP programs often have
established peer support programs. The work of Shapiro at
Brigham and Women’s Hospital has shown that the support
of a trusted and trained colleague is beneficial to the surgeon
when a severe adverse event has occurred [21]. Given
increasing regulatory requirements for disclosure, these
events should be tracked using performance improvement
tools (see Table 18.2).
   Surgeons have been leaders in the patient safety move-
ment because of a long-standing commitment to analyzing
and remediating error. Grounded in the tradition of an hon-
est and forthright morbidity and mortality conference, it is
not surprising that surgeons are at the forefront of the move-
ment to disclose error.
368    R. Orlando III and S. Calcasola

Table 18.2 Key elements of the safe practice of disclosing unantici-
pated outcomes to patients
Content to be disclosed to the patient and family
 Provide facts about the event
 Results of event analysis to support informed decision-­
   making by the patient
 Presence of error or system failures if known
 Express regret for unanticipated outcome
 Give formal apology if unanticipated outcome caused by
   error or system failure
Institutional requirements
 Integrate disclosure, patient safety, and risk management
   activities
 Establish disclosure support system
 Provide background disclosure education
 Ensure that disclosure coaching is available at all times
 Provide emotional support for healthcare workers,
   administrators, patients, and families
 Use performance improvement tools to track and enhance
   disclosure


Selected Reading
 1. Cook RI, Woods DD. Operating at the sharp end: the complexity
    of human error. In: Bogner MS, editor. Human errors in medi-
    cine. Hillsdale: NJL Erlbaum; 1994. p. 255–310.
 2. Pronovost PJ, Armstrong C, et al. Creating a high-reliability
    health care system: improving performance on core processes of
    care at Johns Hopkins Medicine. Acad Med. 2015;90(2):165–72.
 3. Kohn LT, Corrigan JM, Donaldson MS, editors. To err is human.
    Washington, DC: National Academy; 1999.
 4. Reason JT. Human error. New York: Cambridge University;
    1990.
       Chapter 18.   Disclosure of Complications and Error      369

 5. Thomas EJ, Brennan TA. Errors and adverse events in medicine:
    an overview. In: Vincent C, editor. Clinical risk management.
    London: BMJ Books; 2001. p. 32.
 6. Bosk CL. Forgive and remember: managing medical failure.
    Chicago: University of Chicago; 1979. p. 36–70.
 7. The Joint Commission. Hospital accreditation standards.
    Oakbrook Terrace: Joint Commission Resources; 2007.
 8. Safe practices for better healthcare. Washington, DC: National
    Quality Forum; 2007. http://www.qualityforum.org/projects/
    completed/safe_practices/.
 9. Online: Disclosure of Errors. AHRQ’ online. https://psnet.ahrq.
    gov/primer/disclosure-errors. 27 Aug 2020.
10. Frangou C. The art of error disclosure. Gen Surg News.
    2007;34:1–22. Hobogood C, Peck CR, Gilbert B, Chappell K,
    Zou B. Medical errors-what and when: what do patients want to
    know? Acad Emerg Med. 2002;9:1156–61.
11. Online: Code of Medical Ethics Opinion 8.6. 14 Nov 2016.
    https://www.ama-­a ssn.org/delivering-­c are/ethics/promoting-­
    patientsafety#:~:text=(a)%20Disclose%20the%20occur-
    rence%20of,decisions%20about%20future%20medical%20
    care. 29 Aug 2020.
12. Gallagher TH, Studdert D, Levinson W. Disclosing harmful
    medical errors to patients. NEJM. 2007;356:2713–9.
13. Mazor KM, Simon SR, Yood RA, Martinson BC, Gunter MJ,
    Reed GW, et al. Health plan members views about disclosure of
    medical errors. Ann Inter Med. 2004;140:409–18.
14. Wu AW, Folkman S, McPhee SJ, Lo B. Do house officers learn
    from their mistakes? JAMA. 1991;265:2089–94.
15. Gallagher TH, Waterman AD, Garbutt JM, Kapp JM, Chan DK,
    Dunnagan WC, et al. US and Canadian physicians attitudes and
    experiences regarding disclosing errors to patients. Arch Intern
    Med. 2006;166:1605–11.
16. Loren DJ, Garbutt J, Dunagan WC, et al. Risk managers, physi-
    cians and disclosure of harmful medical errors. Jt Comm J Qual
    Patient Saf. 2010;36:99–100.
17. Boothman RC, Blackwell AC, Campbell DC, Commiskey E,
    Anderson S. A better approach to medical malpractice claims:
    the University of Michigan experience. J Health Life Sci Law.
    2009;2:125–60.
18. Kraman SS, Hamm G. Risk management extreme honesty may
    be the best policy. Ann Intern Med. 1999;131:963–7.
370    R. Orlando III and S. Calcasola

19. Chan DK, Gallagher TH, Reznick R, Levinson W. How surgeons
    disclose medical errors to patients: a study using standardized
    patients. Surgery. 2005;138:851–8.
20. Michelle M, Mello J, et al. The medical liability climate and
    prospects for reform. JAMA. 2014;312(20):2146–55. https://doi.
    org/10.1001/jama.2014.10705.
21. Shapiro J, Galowitz P. Peer support for clinicians: a program-
    matic approach. Acad Med. 2016;10:1200–4.
22. The Michigan Model: Medical Malpractice and Patient Safety
    at UMHS. Retrieved from: http://www.uofmhealth.org/
    michigan-­model-­medical-­malpractice-­and-­patient-­safety-­umhs.
23. Kachalia A, et al. Liability claims and costs before and after
    implementation of a medical error disclosure program. Ann
    Intern Med. 2010;153(4):213–21.
24. Mello MM, et al. Communication and resolution programs: the
    challenges and lessons learned from six early adopters. Health
    Aff. 2014;33(1):20–9.
25. Gallagher T, et al. Making communication and resolution pro-
    grammes mission critical in healthcare organizations. BMJ Qual
    Saf. 2020;29(11):01–4.
26. Peto R, et al. One system’s journey in creating a disclosure and
    apology program. Jt Comm J Qual Saf. 2009;35(10):487–96.
27. Mello MM, et al. Outcomes in two Massachusetts hospital sys-
    tems give reason for an optimism about communication-and-­
    resolution programs. Health Aff. 2017;36(10):179501803.
28. Mello MM, et al. Challenges of implementing a communication-­
    and-­ resolution program where multiple organizations must
    cooperate. Health Serv Res. 2016;51:2550–68.
29. Massachusetts Alliance for Communication and Resolution fol-
    lowing Medical Injury. 2020. https://www.macrmi.info/. Accessed
    14 Sept 2020.
30. Gallaher TH, Mello MM, Sage W, et al. Can communication-­
    and-­resolution programs achieve potential? Five key questions.
    Health Aff. 2018;37:1845–52.
31. McDonald TB, Van Niel M, Gocke H, et al. Implementing com-
    munication and resolution programs: lessons learned from the
    first 200 hospitals. J Pat Saf Risk Manag. 2018;23:73–8.
32. Kachalia A, Kaufman SR, Boothman R, et al. Liability costs
    before and after implementation of a medical error disclosure
    program. Ann Intern Med. 2010;153(4):213–21.
      Chapter 18.   Disclosure of Complications and Error    371

33. Moore J, Bismark M, Mello MM. Patients’ experience with
    communication-and- resolution programs after medical injury.
    JAMA. 2017;177(11):1595–603.
34. Agency of Healthcare Research and Quality. Communication
    and Optimal Resolution (CANDOR) toolkit. https://www.ahrq.
    gov/patient-­safety/capacity/candor/modules.html. Accessed 16
    Sept 2020.
35. Mello MM, et al. Ensuring successful implementation of
    communication-­  and-resolution programmes. BMJ Qual Saf.
    2020;29:1.
Chapter 19
Avoidance
of Complications
Prashant Sinha



The desire to avoid complications is embedded in the
Hippocratic Oath and well precedes the often cited Institute
of Medicine report from 1999 [1]. Our training, both cognitive
and technical, has been passed down with rigorous discipline;
our knowledge disseminated in journals and conferences and
our colleagues critiqued weekly in morbidity and mortality
serve as continual reminders of this profound desire. The
Institute of Medicine report and many others preceding it
and following it have changed the way we think about medi-
cal errors and will continue to shape the way we think about
preventing them. This chapter will identify the methods and,
when available, the evidence behind modern strategies taken
to prevent complications. While these approaches must
­necessarily be applied to their specific clinical frameworks to
 affect a specific outcome, I hope to stimulate new thinking
 about the problem of surgical complications with a novel set
 of tools.




P. Sinha (*)
Department of Surgery, NYU Langone Medical Center,
Brooklyn, NY, USA
e-mail: prashant.sinha@nyumc.org; http://nyulangone.org/
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature   373
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_19
374   P. Sinha

Morbidity and Mortality
This conference has been applied across every medical spe-
cialty from psychiatry and family medicine to all surgical
specialties. Over the past two decades, however, calls to
restructure this conference have centered around multiple
themes. A PubMed search for “morbidity and mortality con-
ference” was conducted, and 500 results were reviewed for
relevance yielding 84 articles. Thirty-one articles were dated
before 2010. Thematically, morbidity and mortality (M&M)
conferences were critiqued for not using evidence, not linking
the conference to performance improvement, and being
accusatory rather than systematic. The redesign of M&M
envisions a learning environment linked with system-level
quality improvement at the hospital and even national level.
Redesign also places the objectives of the ACGME at the
front and sustainability for lessons learned. The objectives of
improving M&M were best achieved with structured datasets
relevant to national population trends or local hospital sys-
tem quality objectives that are tracked and analyzed, pre-
sented in a standardized manner, and moderated with experts,
with interactive assessment captured for evidence of
learning.
   The reimagined M&M is evidence-based, includes local
data to review overall performance in areas of interest, and
uses a system-based approach to deconstruct a complication
into the errors or variations in care that led to the complica-
tion. In order to create a learning system, the rich discussion
that often accompanies case level discussions and its context
in the local healthcare system should be captured. Impactful
complications and complications that occur at a higher than
desired frequency deserve further attention beyond
M&M. The hand-off from M&M to a process improvement
team is critical to ensure that the mistakes are not repeated
and that the learning is sustained. Risk adjustment and unex-
pected outcomes, both good and bad, can be found in large
datasets, and both types of variations can serve as a more
impactful case selection tool for M&M and subsequent per-
formance improvement as described by Bohnen et al. [2].
                 Chapter 19. Avoidance of Complications      375

Reporting Bias
The natural human tendency to hide from error is so pervasive
that it creates a strong implicit bias even in our published lit-
erature [3]. The positive outcome bias reflects a tendency of
editors to strongly prefer novel and positive findings over
mundane or negative findings. This bias unfortunately reduces
the reliability and impact of our data and gives lesser credence
to low value interventions. It increases the chances that low
value interventions or, worse, potentially damaging interven-
tions are repeatedly used. In order to counteract this bias, the
opposite should occur. There is value in repeating experiments
and collating larger datasets. Research is sometimes reactive,
revealing comparative effectiveness only after provocative
studies stimulate additional research. In effect, researchers
should encourage debate and scrutiny to arrive at the best
conclusions. A relatively recent example is the practice of com-
bining mechanical bowel preparation with oral antibiotics
before elective colon surgery. This practice, called into ques-
tion, led to its study at the same time CMS increased its scru-
tiny on infections after colon surgery. After some debate, the
scrutiny and increasing literature has led us back to the older
practice, with large datasets culminated from both positive and
negative studies. SAGES has historically used the voice of its
Presidency and its Board to drive large-­scale change in a posi-
tive way, for example, in identifying the dangers of using syn-
thetic mesh in hiatal hernia repair and in creating a consensus
conference to address the continued problem of bile duct
injury. Reactive research, regulatory bodies, and national soci-
eties are important tools to affect change, but these tools take
time and require a great deal of deliberation for their output.
    Clinical data registries (CDR), including regional collab-
oratives, are an alternative. They are an increasingly used
instrument of process improvement that are faster and more
specific to their various specialties. There is no assumption a
priori of either positive or negative outcomes in such a regis-
try. The outcomes over time generate both positive and nega-
tive signals that are detected statistically and whose relevance
is then assessed. The Society for Thoracic Surgery (STS) car-
376   P. Sinha

diothoracic database set a high bar with their data registry,
and the detailed and comprehensive collection has been
invaluable in improving performance across the nation.
Numerous advances have been achieved from analysis of this
national registry including reduced transfusions, earlier
mobility, reductions in cardiopulmonary bypass time, and
reduced length of stay following coronary bypass surgery. The
ASMBS database for bariatric surgery, the ACS’ National
Surgical Quality Improvement Program, Vascular Quality
Initiative, Americas’ Hernia Society Quality Collaborative,
and the like have been empowering research that is driven
from large datasets with wide ownership. CDRs can help
drive improvements in clinical outcomes, by identifying spe-
cific targets for reducing variability. Variables in large datas-
ets that demonstrate high variability can indicate the best
targets for process improvement and can subsequently lead
to better outcomes and better cost containment. Calls for
national registries in inflammatory bowel disease, emergency
general surgery, and other specialties are gaining traction and
will continue to aid this effort. The progress toward more col-
lected data is slow, as the initial effort to build a registry and
its infrastructure is both large and expensive, and ongoing
data collection requires training and dedicated personnel.
Widespread participation in national registries has been ham-
pered by their maintenance cost, and hospital systems have to
weigh those costs against the future gains in performance
promised by participation. Mandatory reporting, as required
by local or national health authorities, may increase adoption
of registries that have delivered the most value, while grants
and local funding sources may help others gain traction, but
the registries will increasingly play a pivotal role in aiding the
goal of performance improvement [4].


Checklists to Bundles
Atul Gawande reached across disciplines to use process engi-
neering tools. He asked whether checklists could be used in
medicine to reduce errors. Most of us have benefitted from
                 Chapter 19. Avoidance of Complications      377

the use of these checklists when we perform central line
insertions or to verify allergies, antibiotics, and laterality
before an operative procedure. Checklists have been shown
to reduce mortality and complications; however, they are best
used when the complexity of a process can be readily broken
down into quantifiable steps. Variability in medicine and in
surgery can occur from many different areas. In order to
reduce variability, one has to know where to look. An entire
process does not need to be deconstructed, but one only need
to know where variability can affect outcomes. A visible
marker of variability is surgical site infections following colon
procedures. The literature has an enormous volume treating
this one area, and more recently, the approach to reducing
these postop infections has taken the broad learnings and has
combined them into a readily deployable process: the bundle.
This is a departure from the checklist philosophy that seeks
to control all the steps and factors in a given process. The
colorectal literature has indicated that for any given patient,
it is not always known which combination of factors will con-
tribute to an infection. In this case, a care bundle is an
approach that uses many elements all at once to modify mul-
tiple host and environment factors in parallel to achieve a
better and more consistent result for most patients. Having
embarked on a PI project to reduce colon SSI at three differ-
ent hospitals, I can attest to the complexity of the challenge.
At one hospital, prolonged operative times and hypothermia
appeared to be risk factors. At another hospital, increasing
adherence to an ERAS bundle was important, and at a third,
changing antibiotic prophylaxis and enforcing the use of
clean wound closure trays made a difference. Ultimately, a
bundled approach that uses techniques from early recovery
pathways, wound care techniques, microbial surveillance, and
preoperative preparation can consistently address the variety
of factors that can lead to postoperative infections. The
strength of evidence supporting a bundle approach is signifi-
cant – the more elements of a care bundle that are adhered
to, the better the patient outcome [5]. The bundle approach to
infection prevention has now expanded across many high-
risk procedures.
378   P. Sinha

Professionalism and Competency
No student embarks on a career in medicine or surgery
believing that they will provide anything but the best care.
The long duration of training attests to the surgeon’s dedica-
tion as a clinician, scientists, and humanitarian, but, in spite of
that time, variability in the individual still occurs. A widely
cited finding in the New England Journal of Medicine identi-
fied that malpractice claims were concentrated into a few
physicians. Only 6% of the over 900,000 physicians had a
claim and 1% of physicians, having at least two paid claims,
accounted for 32% of all claims. Apart from an increased risk
for males and later stages of practice, repeat claims strongly
predicted additional claims, raising the concern for individual
behaviors. While the claims inherently are not a great corre-
late of substandard care, these findings suggest a behavioral
component [6].
    In another study, a comparison of malpractice claims
against 360-degree peer evaluations demonstrated a strong
correlation for certain types of negative and positive behav-
iors. Five behaviors were listed as having the highest odds
ratios for malpractice claims: “snaps at others when frus-
trated,” “talks down,” “considers suggestions,” “pays
­attention,” and “informs others.” Personal behaviors can be
 associated with malpractice claims, and this among other
 research illustrates that a few individuals can have measur-
 able and negative effect on patients, peers, and their health-
 care systems [7]. Medical education curricula have therefore
 included aspects of professionalism for young physician
 degree candidates and postgraduate trainees.
    Missing, unfortunately, is a body of evidence that can pro-
 spectively identify or modify those behaviors. However, there
 are important areas such as prompt and transparent disclo-
 sure of errors that are beneficial to both patient and practitio-
 ner, even if they do not prevent error. Consequently, there
 has been a focus on this in board certification and mainte-
 nance of certification and whether either has value. A study
                Chapter 19. Avoidance of Complications     379

evaluating almost two million procedures by 14,598 surgeons
revealed that achieving board certification was associated
with 21% less chance of having outlier complication rates.
However, board certification and maintenance of certifica-
tion did not correlate with exemplary complication rates;
exemplary surgeons had higher volumes and affiliations with
larger hospitals [8].
   Without wading into the considerable debate around
board certification, it suffices to say that it is important to
expect and independently assess a basic level of cognitive and
ideally technical proficiency. It is also important to expect a
level of professionalism and to educate our trainees about the
dangers of disruptive behaviors. The ACGME is moving
toward addressing these gaps in assessment through the use
of entrustable professional activities (EPA). Rather than
redefining competencies, EPAs serve as a framework to set
trainee expectations and guide a supervisor’s assessment in
order to allow an entrustment decision [9]. An entrustment
decision may be unsupervised completion of an appendec-
tomy, for example. This level of entrustment would require a
trainee to demonstrate certain knowledge, skills, and atti-
tudes. An instructor would be required to assess consistent
achievement of the same in order to allow an entrustment
decision, whether it be direct supervision or unsupervised.
This framework could be applied to junior faculty but logisti-
cally has significant challenges [10].
   We do not yet know the impact of EPAs and other tools
for competency assessment on patient outcomes. Specifically,
can we help our colleagues avoid complications through
structured evaluation during training and early practice? The
prevalence of surgeon variability coupled with decreased
time in training in this era of reduced work hours will ensure
that competency assessment tools will continue to evolve. The
ultimate goal will be to reduce the variability of our trainees
entering the workforce. Until then, post hoc assessments
based on outcomes will continue to drive how we identify
outliers.
380   P. Sinha

Simulation and Skill Assessment
Inescapable is the desire to understand the technical skill
level of a given surgeon. This might be one of the most mys-
terious statistics in medicine. On the face of it, one could scoff
at the notion of trading “baseball cards” of surgeons, but
perhaps many people actually desire this for different rea-
sons. The public has little objective data by which to choose a
surgeon, hospitals may believe this to be an important mea-
sure of efficiency, and certainly the risk managers and attor-
neys would find these measures too helpful. Most things in
medicine cannot however be distilled to the skills used in an
operating room, but those skills certainly matter. Simulated
and real-world skill assessments, just like checklists, have to
be complete in capturing the process that they try to distill.
The transferability of simulation, the validity of simulation,
and the ease and reproducibility of scoring can be variable
and highly dependent on the skill being studied. However,
when correlates of high volume on good outcomes abound in
the literature, particularly in highly complex procedures, a
tendency to focus on the practitioner rather than the entire
environment is hard to avoid. A number of validated skills
ratings systems do exist such as Fundamentals of Laparoscopic
Surgery (FLS), Fundamentals of the Use of Safe Energy
(FUSE), Objective Structured Assessment of Technical
Skills(O-SATS), Global Operative Assessment of
Laparoscopic Skills (GOALS), Global Evaluative Assessment
of Robotic Skills(GEARS), and Crowd-Sourced Assessment
of Technical Skills (C-SATS). The process of rating is resource
intensive, and, even with the use of a tool such as C-SATS
that uses crowd-sourcing review of video, the results can reli-
ably distinguish less skilled surgeons but currently have not
been well studied against hard outcomes data [11].
Furthermore, most of the excellent work done on assessment
remains in specific fields such as urology or with specific tools
such as laparoscopy or robotic surgery. Nevertheless, some
assessments now serve as validated competency assessments
including FLS and FUSE. The future of these objective
                Chapter 19. Avoidance of Complications     381

scores remains open and will serve as an added data point for
performance improvement. Ultimately, research remains to
understand the degree of effect technical skills have on out-
comes and on defining the correct skills to focus on that can
be readily and easily measured, for each procedure. It seems
like a daunting task, but progress toward reproducible mea-
surements is exciting and may continue to provide achievable
milestones that will benefit patient care.


High Reliability
All the aforementioned tools, training, and assessments need
to be placed into a framework that can be readily used in any
healthcare system. The ultimate goal of high performance,
which can be measured, is the reduction of variability. The
aphorism attributed to various physicians and famous indi-
viduals that good judgment comes from experience and expe-
rience from bad judgment need not be so. Surgeons are
trained with time and volume requirements that enable them
to obtain the proper experience and judgment. At least, we
believe this to be the case within our system that has been
developed and refined over time. Those achieving board
­certification have gained the cognitive skills to perform rea-
 sonably well. Those that maintain a high volume of practice
 are expected to perform at higher levels, unless they have
 exhibited disruptive behaviors that increase their chances of
 repeated malpractice claims. The future, however, is driven by
 an aversion to risk. We seek a better educational system that
 sequentially graduates surgeons through competency and
 skills-based assessments. Until we can consistently perform
 and intervene on these types of assessments, we must use
 system-level tools that are providing solutions that appear to
 work to reduce variability and error. “System failures are
 errors in the design, organization, training, or maintenance
 that lead to operator errors. Those failures involving direct
 contact with the patient – human failures – are often part of
 the proximate cause of an event” [12]. The best way to avoid
382   P. Sinha

errors is to prevent humans from making them, through
structural barriers like checklists, bundles, and pathways.
Identifying where to look next for interventions must come
from large and shared datasets. The signals that we seek are
not from mortality but from subtler and earlier signs and
symptoms; this requires specialty-specific intelligence. Finally,
there has to be an appetite to invest in the data systems that
can help identify and then correct areas of variability.
Alignment of goals within a hospital, hospital network, and
region or across the nation can facilitate this. CMS has
already learned that financial rewards and punishments are
helpful, but only go so far. James Reason, famously known for
the Swiss cheese model of error, acknowledged long ago,
“Measures that involve sanctions and exhortations (that is,
moralistic measures directed to those at the sharp end) have
only very limited effectiveness, especially so in the case of
highly trained professionals” [13].
    Hospital systems that have chosen to take these lessons
seriously understand that implementation is the next impor-
tant challenge. Their next evolution is into a high reliability
organization (HRO). An entire book can be devoted to this,
but the basic principles can be outlined as follows: All mem-
bers of an organization are called upon to act together on
shared goals. For example, a medical-surgical floor team may
discuss interventions that can help prevent patient falls; any
staff walking past a room should stop and respond to a
patient that is calling out or has rung a bell for assistance. This
example illustrates important concepts in an HRO. Hierarchy
is removed, accountability is given to everyone, a specific
action is defined, and a specific result is measured and
tracked. An HRO takes hundreds of these measurable tasks,
studies them, and refines their interventions until a sustain-
able reliable outcome is achieved. A cultural transformation
is required to move toward an HRO. The five principles that
define a high reliability organization are as follows: (1) preoc-
cupation with failure, (2) reluctance to simplify interpreta-
                 Chapter 19. Avoidance of Complications      383

tions, (3) sensitivity to operations, (4) commitment to
resilience, and (5) deference to expertise. Effectively an HRO
constantly monitors for safety issues and errors, adjusts
accordingly, and maintains the operations that keep the orga-
nization safe while recognizing that anyone with expertise is
valued. A complex operation will inevitably have errors, but
the goal is recovery, learning, and anticipation of these errors.
A healthcare system that aims to become a high reliability
organization can begin immediately but to perform well must
continue to practice and mature [14]. The maturity is best
seen as a system first learns to react to errors and eventually
begins to look for weaknesses and proactively fix them.


Conclusion
Can we avoid complications? Yes. Can we help all trainees
consistently avoid complications? Maybe. Reviewing lessons
learned from individual cases should never stop, as a great
deal of detail and insight can be gained through critical analy-
sis of a single event. In most root cause analyses, the individ-
ual practitioner usually holds a small portion of accountability
relative to the flaws in the systematic framework in which
they work. In order to move our safety systems forward, the
framework of accountability that follows the principles of a
high reliability organization may prove to be the most effec-
tive. Within it, the individual strategies employed to improve
safety and avoid complications are varied but may include
aspects of training, assessments of skill and competency, atti-
tudes, and behavior, coupled with targeted statistical analysis
using large datasets and structured interventions. Surgeons
are well suited to improving quality and preventing complica-
tions by adopting these among other quality tools. Armed
with data and a desire for continuous improvement, surgeons
can improve their outcomes with more than a scalpel.
384    P. Sinha

References
 1. Institute of Medicine (US) Committee on Quality of Health
    Care in America. In: Kohn LT, Corrigan JM, Donaldson MS, edi-
    tors. To err is human: building a safer health system. Washington,
    DC: The National Academies Press; 2000. p. 312.
 2. Bohnen JD, Chang DC, Lillemoe KD. Reconceiving the mor-
    bidity and mortality conference in an era of big data: an “unex-
    pected” outcomes approach. Ann Surg. 2016;263(5):857–9.
 3. Callaham ML, et al. Positive-outcome bias and other limitations
    in the outcome of research abstracts submitted to a scientific
    meeting. JAMA. 1998;280(3):254–7.
 4. Romanelli JR, et al. Public reporting and transparency: a primer
    on public outcomes reporting. Surg Endosc. 2019;33(7):2043–9.
 5. Jaffe TA, et al. Optimizing value of colon surgery in Michigan.
    Ann Surg. 2017;265(6):1178–82.
 6. Studdert DM, et al. Prevalence and characteristics of physicians
    prone to malpractice claims. N Engl J Med. 2016;374(4):354–62.
 7. Lagoo J, et al. Multisource evaluation of surgeon behavior is
    associated with malpractice claims. Ann Surg. 2019;270(1):84–90.
 8. Xu T, et al. Association between board certification, mainte-
    nance of certification, and surgical complications in the United
    States. Am J Med Qual. 2019;34(6):545–52.
 9. Ten Cate O. Nuts and bolts of entrustable professional activities.
    J Grad Med Educ. 2013;5(1):157–8.
10. Hoops HE, Deveney KE, Brasel KJ. Development of an assess-
    ment tool for surgeons in their first year of independent practice:
    the junior surgeon performance assessment tool. J Surg Educ.
    2019;76(6):e199–208.
11. Ghani KR, et al. Measuring to improve: peer and crowd-sourced
    assessments of technical skill with robot-assisted radical prosta-
    tectomy. Eur Urol. 2016;69(4):547–50.
12. Chang A, et al. The JCAHO patient safety event taxon-
    omy: a standardized terminology and classification schema
    for near misses and adverse events. Int J Qual Health Care.
    2005;17(2):95–105.
13. Reason J. Understanding adverse events: human factors. Qual
    Health Care. 1995;4(2):80–9.
14. Chassin MR, Loeb JM. High-reliability health care: getting there
    from here. Milbank Q. 2013;91(3):459–90.
Chapter 20
Safe Introduction
of Technology
Kathleen Lak




Introduction
Technology in medicine is expanding at a rapid pace. The
ability to safely adopt and implement new surgical technolo-
gies can be challenging at both provider and hospital system
levels. Patient safety and quality are often the basis of techno-
logical advancements, but a systematic method for verifying
the intended and unintended consequences of new technolo-
gies has been overshadowed in the past by the swift imple-
mentation and mass use. In this chapter, we will discuss how
surgical technology has been introduced to widespread use in
the past, what kind of challenges or missteps were made
along the way, and where we are headed as far as assessments
for safe introduction of technology in the future.




K. Lak (*)
Bariatric and Minimally Invasive Gastrointestinal Surgery, Medical
College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, USA
e-mail: klak@mcw.edu

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature    385
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_20
386   K. Lak

Introduction of Surgical Technology
 in the Past: Laparoscopic Cholecystectomy
Since the time of barber shop bloodletting in the fourteenth
and fifteenth centuries, the field of surgery has been evolving.
In a major leap of innovation, laparoscopic surgery entered
the arena in the late twentieth century and changed the
approach to surgery as we know it. The introduction of the
laparoscopic cholecystectomy highlights what is thrilling
about innovation in the surgical field and what is dangerous
in unchecked dissemination of that innovation. Prior to its
use in general surgery, laparoscopic approaches were mainly
used in gynecology. In 1985, the first laparoscopic cholecys-
tectomy was performed by Erich Mühe of Germany [1].
Mühe developed the technique after many years of interest in
laparoscopy and abdominal endoscopy. After laparoscopic
appendectomy was performed in 1980, his interest was fur-
ther ignited in the application of the technology for cholecys-
tectomy. He went on to learn the basics of laparoscopy from
a gynecologic surgeon, and 5 years later Mühe performed his
first laparoscopic cholecystectomy. He presented his work in
1986 at the German Surgical Society Congress and again at
the Lower Rhine-Westphalian Society. At that time, his
achievement was not met with enthusiasm. Philippe Mouret
of France performed the procedure in 1987 followed by
Dubois in 1988. Despite a slow start, the technique spread
across the Atlantic, and the first laparoscopic cholecystec-
tomy was performed in the USA in 1988 by McKernan and
Saye. Over the course of these first years, the procedure was
being modified, tweaked, and improved upon. Mühe began
with a side-viewing scope at the umbilicus with pneumoperi-
toneum fashioned out of bicycle tubing and later transitioned
to a subcostal incision with no pneumoperitoneum.
    The history behind the laparoscopic cholecystectomy is
inspiring with the leap in innovation and the passion behind
bringing the technology to the mainstream. From its incep-
tion, the technology quickly progressed to the standard of
            Chapter 20.   Safe Introduction of Technology   387

care. In what might be an inspiring tale of innovative success,
the actual and potential dangers of this unfettered progress
cast a dark shadow. Over the following several years after
Mühe introduced the technique, the laparoscopic approach
quickly became adopted as the most standard method for
cholecystectomy, replacing the open technique. By 1992, the
National Institute of Health (NIH) issued a consensus state-
ment citing that approximately 80% of cholecystectomies
were being treated laparoscopically [2]. This consensus state-
ment declares that the laparoscopic cholecystectomy is safe
and effective although reports of common bile duct injuries
at that time were reportedly higher. The procedure was
advertised as a marrying of two safe, proven treatments – that
of the open cholecystectomy and laparoscopic surgery, safely
used by gynecologists for decades prior [3, 4]. The more than
twofold increase in the incidence of biliary injuries was not
initially known for a number of reasons [2].
   The widespread use of laparoscopic cholecystectomy is
said to have been propelled by several factors, one strong fac-
tor being market demand. Patients at that time were inter-
ested in the procedure as it gave an alternative to the open
cholecystectomy known for longer hospital stays and recov-
ery time. Surgeons at the time were reportedly pressured to
adopt the procedure swiftly or risk losing patients to competi-
tors [2, 5]. In a patient-driven market, surgeons were quick to
adopt the relatively untested procedure with little objective
data on outcomes. The market pressure and competition
complicated accurate reporting of morbidity or mortality in
the first years after its introduction. Case series from provid-
ers’ early experience and rare randomized trials comparing
open to laparoscopic cholecystectomy were trickling in at the
time, but most were insufficiently powered to detect the dif-
ference in biliary complications. While medical centers
reported low rates of bile duct injury, registry data drew a
different picture with increased referrals for complex biliary
reconstructions [2]. Biliary strictures, which may present
months or years after surgery, were also presumed to be
388   K. Lak

increased with the new innovation, but little data was avail-
able due to a lack of long-term studies following the innova-
tion over time.
   The actual training of surgeons on the technique cannot
be understated either. Surgeons were met with a different
visualization of the surgical field and different instruments
and required a different skill set compared to open chole-
cystectomy, which had been the favored technique for a
century before. The first surgeons to perform and market
the technique in the USA organized courses outside of a
university setting and brought the application of laparos-
copy across the country [6]. The NIH acknowledged in their
1992 consensus statement that adequate physician training
is paramount to achieving good outcomes – although what
constitutes that training had yet to be determined, regu-
lated, or tracked [2]. For many years, laparoscopic cholecys-
tectomy was performed around the country without a
requirement of institutional review board involvement or
other oversight. Surgeons had variable instruction, training,
and technical skills with the procedure, which leads to dif-
ficulty in interpreting data. When the morbidity associated
with the procedure was ultimately recognized, it was ini-
tially attributed to the surgeon “learning curve,” inadequate
training, or insufficient credentialing [3, 4, 7].
   The introduction of laparoscopic cholecystectomy and its
brisk adoption brings up themes illustrating the benefits as
well as risks associated with new innovations and their imple-
mentation. Even in the 1990s, the lack of objective assessment
of the innovative procedure was acknowledged, but it was
stated that controlled studies will likely be unable to be per-
formed due to patient’s refusing to forego the most modern
treatment available [2]. Further, because bile duct injuries are
fortunately infrequent, the number of patients needed to
adequately power such a study renders the creation of such
studies moot. These deterrents to real-time study of new
innovation still complicate the introduction of new therapies,
equipment, and techniques today.
            Chapter 20.   Safe Introduction of Technology    389

Introduction of Surgical Technology
 in the Present: Introduction of the Robotic
 Platform
The evolution of the safe introduction of technology from the
introduction of laparoscopy for cholecystectomy to the pres-
ent can be described in part by the example of the use of the
robotic platform in surgery. Like the laparoscopic cholecys-
tectomy, the introduction and expansion of robotic technol-
ogy in the field of surgery has been swift and widespread.
   Robotic technology has become a usable adjunct to surgi-
cal practice to any surgeon with the interest and wherewithal
to complete the steps necessary for implementation. These
steps vary and differ from hospital to hospital. The necessary
steps to credentialing and obtaining privileges are based on
hospital’s specific processes for assessing the provider’s quali-
fications for a given service. This can be a challenging require-
ment set forth by the Joint Commission as leaders in
healthcare administration are given little guidance on what
constitutes proficiency in new technology [8]. The Society of
American Gastrointestinal and Endoscopic Surgeons
(SAGES) and the Minimally Invasive Robotic Association
(MIRA) produced a document outlining consensus on sev-
eral key topics regarding use of the robotic platform in sur-
gery – in part outlining suggested training and credentialing
requirements [6]. Published in 2007, the document outlines
minimum requirements for granting privileges to providers in
several scenarios of training. While the document does pro-
vide a general outline, individual institutions are required to
define what constitutes a “structured training curriculum,”
what role the proctor will have in precepted cases, and how
many cases are required for competency. Credentialing com-
mittees for new technology develop these criteria.
   In the past, research and development of new medical
technology was a distinctly different arena from that of deter-
mination of physician credentialing and granting of privi-
leges; however, with the introduction of the robotic platform,
390   K. Lak

companies such as Intuitive Surgical began to permeate sur-
gical skills training. What followed was that a private com-
pany, which invested in the expansion of the use of their
product, was now involved with determination of whether
providers were felt to be safe and competent to proceed with
use of their product. This changed in 2017 with a Supreme
Court’s reversal of a lower court’s decision in Taylor vs.
Intuitive. In this case, Intuitive Surgical was found liable for a
poor patient outcome based on failure to warn or inform the
hospital, in addition to the surgeon, of the risks associated
with use of the technology. In this ruling, the liability of
implementing new technology is now shared with the private
company promoting the technology as well as the hospital
aiming to use it. Prior to this ruling, Intuitive Surgical made
recommendations on proctoring of cases and surgical compe-
tency – this was subsequently eliminated to leave these deci-
sions in the hands of local credentialing committees [9, 10].
The ruling in 2017 intervened on this potential avenue for
conflict of interest. Now that the liability is shared by all those
involved, a collaborative but distinct consensus is suggested
to remove any conflict of interest from the discussion on sur-
gical credentialing for individual providers in the case of
robotic surgery.
   The determination of what constitutes adequate training
for credentialing of a new provider in robotic surgery or a
physician in practice gaining additional skills in the field is
highly variable and fraught with individual characteristics
that produce challenges. Several private companies offer
web-based training programs, while others have on-site
hands-on instruction [11]. The advancement of virtual reality
simulation in the robotic surgery training paradigm has
allowed instruction to take place prior to touching patients
[12, 13]. This feature allows for improvement in surgeon com-
fort with the technology as well as proficiency in skills and
overall efficiency. Some hands-on training programs incorpo-
rate mentorship by expert robotic-surgeon trainers to allow
for constructive feedback in real time. Credentialing or new
technology committees at individual institutions determine
            Chapter 20.   Safe Introduction of Technology    391

the requirements needed to grant physician privileges.
Validation of these methods is forthcoming.
   The introduction of the robotic platform improved upon
many of the missteps from the introduction of laparoscopic
cholecystectomy. Training programs are bolstering the prepa-
ration of surgeons in didactic curricula, hands-on instruction,
and virtual reality. Credentialing and new technology com-
mittees are the gatekeeper to physician privileging for use of
robotic surgery. The gaps in training and our ability to define
what constitutes an able and knowledgeable surgeon for the
technology as well as evidence-based guidelines to oversee
use of the technology are yet to be determined. In the setting
of frequent new devices hitting the market, strategies such as
these to guide the safe implementation of innovation outside
the scope of robotic surgery are needed now more than ever.


I ntroduction of Surgical Technology: Proposals
 for the Future
Defining Innovation
Progress in the field of surgery over the past 100 years has
been extensive. The giant leaps in the development of the
surgical standard of care for common surgical ailments were
for the most part not bolstered by randomized controlled tri-
als and long-term outcomes. Evaluation of evolving proce-
dures or technology in the operating room was not
commonplace in decades past in lieu of essentially trial and
error with patients on the receiving end [14]. This is not to say
that there were not altruistic intentions of improving patient
care, but evidence-based medicine as we know it did not yet
exist. With each trip to the operating room, surgeons are met
with unique situations at hand which demand action. What
begins as a variation in the way a surgical problem is
addressed may develop into a new technique altogether.
There is little clarity of what constitutes surgeon discretion,
from innovative trial and error to experimental technique.
392   K. Lak

The surgical minutia is not played out in an informed consent
process as much of this detail is not considered experimental
but nonetheless is a form of untested innovation. The exam-
ple described in our first section on the introduction of lapa-
roscopic cholecystectomy is one example of untested
innovation becoming widely disseminated. What began as a
disruptive use of technology in a different way became main-
stream prior to objective short- or long-term testing. This
inevitably leaves potential for unintended consequences
without oversight.
   Fast forward to the twenty-first century; we now have shar-
ing of surgical techniques daily on social media platforms and
private surgical groups such as Twitter or Facebook. There is
instantaneous sharing of cases, techniques, intraoperative
decisions, and resulting discourse between surgeons world-
wide. This arena is bolstered by real-time experience with
those sharing often seeking feedback or critiques. This form
of information dispersion is far from the randomized con-
trolled trials that garner objective evidence, but it does hold
the potential to influence the way surgery is practiced.
   In the information age, we now look toward reproducible
scientific methods to thoroughly evaluate the quality, safety,
and short- and long-term efficacy of modifications to the sur-
gical standard of care. When these modifications are in the
form of pharmaceuticals, a regimented system for evaluation
is required. However, when that modification is a surgical
innovation, technique, or product, the playing field is largely
unregulated.


 valuation of Innovation in Pharmaceuticals
E
and Surgery
To adequately envision a framework for the safe introduction
of surgical innovation, the pharmaceutical industry’s method
is often described. Assessment of the safety and efficacy of
pharmaceuticals involves a regulated process overseen by the
US Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Initial steps
            Chapter 20.   Safe Introduction of Technology   393

include animal studies for safety with dosing in phase 0. Prior
to moving on to human studies, FDA approval of an
Investigational New Drug (IND) application must be met.
What follows are three additional phases of trials for clinical
safety and efficacy in humans. Randomized placebo-­
controlled trials are required, which adds a measure of com-
plexity and expense to the process. The phases of
pharmaceutical development are generally in succession
requiring a predictable prolonged duration of analysis prior
to achieving completion of the monitoring phase 4.
    Each phase in this process has been defined and devel-
oped with the aim of patient safety and quality in mind. Phase
1 human studies are conducted on a small cohort of healthy
volunteers. A tolerable dose range is determined as well as
the safety with a limited number of doses. Phase 2 studies are
generally randomized controlled trials (RCTs), and this is the
first time the IND is used on the targeted patient population.
Markers assessing for efficacy are often assessed at this stage.
Phase 3 studies expand this research to include thousands of
patients and are designed to assess the safety and efficacy of
the drug using predefined endpoints [15]. The outcomes of
these studies are used to apply for market approval through
the FDA. Phase 4 studies are generally post-market studies
which continually assess for long-term adverse outcomes or
use in alternative populations.
    What should be taken from this concise description of the
rigorous process for safe implementation of pharmaceuticals
is its direct comparison to the process for safe implementa-
tion of new surgical technologies and innovation: that no such
process exists. At this point in our history, surgical technology
is arguably advancing at a higher speed than ever. The intro-
duction of these technological advances is unstandardized,
not systematically regulated, and largely unstructured. Where
the FDA holds an oversight of new pharmaceutical products,
no overseeing body has defined what constitutes safe intro-
duction of surgical technology. This is not to say that individu-
als, surgical groups, technology companies, and leaders within
the field have not provided suggestions in this arena.
394   K. Lak

   The pharmaceutical industry’s systematic approach to new
drug development and its path to the clinical market was not
always as regimented as it is today. The history of new drug
development began with failures as well – namely, drugs
brought into clinical use and later withdrawn or restricted
due to unforeseen side effects [14]. The regulation that fol-
lowed led to the current system overseen in the USA. The
oversight of surgical innovation in the form of surgical tech-
nology is less stringent, and oversight of innovation in the
form of therapies or techniques does not exist. The role that
the FDA plays with regard to surgical innovation is small. The
process begins with a determination of how novel the new
product is compared to that already on the market. New
innovations, as opposed to pharmaceuticals, can achieve pre-
market approval without the strict degree of evidence
required by new drugs coming to the market. A fast-track
assessment process is used if the device or innovation is “sub-
stantially equivalent” to a predicate device. Innovative proce-
dures or techniques have no place within the FDA’s regulatory
process unless submitted as a research study. Often surgical
techniques or procedures are developed in the clinical setting
with reporting of the successes or failures in the form of non-­
comparative trials, retrospective cases series, or case reports.
   An example of this process is use of radiofrequency (RF)
ablation for metastatic colorectal malignancy in the liver. The
device itself offers treatment of non-resectable liver tumors
and has broadened the treatment algorithm for metastatic
colorectal cancer. The technology involves use of a novel
device, so FDA approval was required prior to its introduc-
tion into the surgical marketplace. The requirement for FDA
approval for clinical use was to show that the device could
safely ablate hepatic tissue – which it did. The questions that
remained unanswered at the time of its introduction included
whether the technique was equally effective in the treatment
of resectable lesions. Was this treatment recommended for
patients with only otherwise unresectable disease, or was this
an option for patients with resectable disease as well? In this
example, we see consideration for research into the indica-
            Chapter 20.   Safe Introduction of Technology   395

tions for the use of the device. Expanding its use would intui-
tively require oversight, informed consent, and tracking.
Offering the technique to patients with resectable lesions,
those interested in a less invasive procedure, for example,
would be putting the patient in harm’s way as a proven effec-
tive open procedure is known. The potential for patient harm
is clear, but the device as approved by the FDA is now in use
with little oversight into patient selection and reporting of
results. The limitations of our assessment of the technology
are evident. Likewise, in the introduction of the adult-to-­
adult live donor liver transplantation, there was not insignifi-
cant risk of major morbidity in the donor, but the procedure
moved forward at many institutions around the country with
variable involvement of institutional review boards (IRB) or
oversight committees [3, 14]. In each example, the innovation
has massive potential for patient benefit and leaps forward in
our treatment of complex clinical scenarios, but would a regu-
lated approach with a pause for evidence-based analyses
protect our patients in the process? In these examples, the
ability to protect patients and weigh the benefits and harms
of a new innovation lies with the provider.
    As described by Strasberg et al., patients who undergo
innovative procedures have no protection from the uncer-
tainties of that procedure; those who undergo procedures
with innovative devices approved by the FDA, based on
predicate devices, have no guarantee that the device can meet
the intended goals [3]. We have caught up to the limitations
of our regulatory bodies. An ideal solution would be one that
offers protection to patients without dampening innovation.
Regulation and bureaucracy may have the consequence of
adding significant time and money to the innovative process.
Delaying significant advances in medicine and surgery could
impact innumerable patient lives when potential therapies
are stuck in red tape.
    As mentioned previously, when the technology or advance-
ment is in the form of a surgical procedure, the process for
safe implementation is even less clear. The definition of an
innovative surgical procedure is “a new or modified proce-
396   K. Lak

dure that differs from currently accepted local practice, the
outcomes of which has not yet been described, and which
may entail risk to the patient” [16]. Innovations are further
defined by taxonomy such as simple tool modification, revo-
lutionary changes in tools such as laparoscopy, or revolution-
ary changes in science such as aseptic technique. How we
communicate about these levels of innovation is important
when determining the best methods for evaluation. The
Belmont report, published in 1979, aimed in part to protect
patients from a trial-and-error type of research at the clinical
level [17]. What constitutes research remains a gray area in
procedural specialties. A surgeon’s modification of technique
over time – even the slightest adaptation of method – would
certainly not constitute a research study; however, when a
provider strays in “a significant way” from the standard prac-
tice, then a research study should be encouraged. This lack of
ability to define innovation by regulatory bodies inevitably
leaves the decision-making in the hands of surgeon
discretion.


 Proposal for the Future: The IDEAL
A
Framework
The IDEAL framework was first introduced in 2009 in a piv-
otal Lancet series on surgical innovation and evaluation [14,
18]. The concept of innovation, development, exploration,
assessment, and long-term study was born out of a need for a
standardized framework for assessment of new technology in
surgery.
   An outlined pathway for the safe introduction of surgical
innovation was described by Barkun et al. in a 2009 pivotal
Lancet series on surgical innovation and evaluation [14].
Aptly named the “IDEAL” paradigm – innovation, develop-
ment, exploration, assessment, and long-term study – the
model follows a framework similarly outlined in the pharma-
ceutical industry for drug development and assessment. As
this process has not clearly been defined in the past, the
            Chapter 20.   Safe Introduction of Technology   397

IDEAL framework acts to define its commonly encountered
stages with efforts to systematically assess innovation with
the goal of patient protection and improvement in care. A
heavy burden of logistical hoops has the potential to stifle
innovation. Development and fostering of innovation as
described by the authors attempts to do just the opposite. The
development of a process to assess surgical innovation is tai-
lored to the creative, entrepreneurial, holistic, and passionate
providers who are driving it.
    In the first stages of innovation, the method, technique, or
technology would be used in prehuman research and devel-
opment. This may include simulation or animal studies. Stage
1 of the IDEAL framework includes the first time the inno-
vation is used in humans. The authors point out that due to
the often intangible nature of innovation in surgery, some
innovation may skip steps in the IDEAL paradigm, whereas
others will follow sequentially through the steps. Innovation
in surgery often is born from a difficult patient problem. If
not in an emergency setting, when the surgeon has the benefit
of time, then it is suggested that the surgeon inform the hos-
pital of the intent to perform a new procedure and informed
consent should reflect it. A formal centralized system should
be developed to track these innovative techniques or proce-
dures, and adverse events, failures, and successes should be
tracked. The ability for the system such as this to thrive would
include a culture shift. The reporting of adverse events cen-
trally may require an anonymous reporting system to encour-
age participation; without such a system in place, it is easy to
imagine the same failed innovations occurring in isolation,
repeatedly, to patients around the world. A centralized
­system would aim to collect this information and distribute
 the successes and failures for collective and prospective
 review. Historically, innovation may first come to peer review
 as described in the form of retrospective case series – this
 method has obvious detriments when it comes to evidence-­
 based medicine. Case series, which make up the majority of
 original research, are prone to uncontrolled bias and con-
 founding factors which make the data arguably of little value
398   K. Lak

[19]. A prospective system with organized and predefined
selection criteria and defined outcome values should be
agreed upon centrally, outside of the parent institution, and
undergo ethical review – all prior to patient recruitment.
   Stage 2 involves more providers and few select patients.
This is the stage when early adopters of innovation get
involved. This stage would ultimately include a learning curve
for providers and will require ethical consent from patients.
How exactly providers are ushered through their learning
curve is a matter of discussion. Mentorship and simulation
have been proposed, but ultimately, all patients involved in
this stage would be followed for complications with meticu-
lous documentation. In addition to standard Institutional
Review Board approval, there should be defined criteria on
who will monitor and oversee patient safety. The indications,
potential benefits, and harms are delineated, and the defini-
tions for trackable outcome measures for long-term efficacy
are refined, edited, and agreed upon. This system may mimic
prior reporting as described in the CONSORT statement for
effective, understandable, and reproducible standards of
documentation [20]. The STROBE recommendations like-
wise laid out standards for clear data communication [21].
The recommendations in either of these statements may be
used as a guide to develop a centralized way of prospectively
following innovation throughout its development and intro-
duction into widespread use.
   In stage 2b the innovation is furthered by inclusion of a
wider breadth of patients. More providers and institutions
may have interest in the innovation and planning for a ran-
domized, controlled trial (RCT) can be undertaken.
Concurrent prospective uncontrolled trials may be initiated
as well. The timing of when an RCT would be appropriate is
another topic of debate, as provider involvement during their
learning curve may be challenging. Data on providers,
patients, and their disease process should be tracked. Likewise,
it would be advantageous to allow for databases to be
            Chapter 20.   Safe Introduction of Technology   399

disease-­centric rather than procedure- or treatment-based.
This change in focus would allow for tracking of patients who
follow traditional pathways and those who are elective for
innovative treatment.
   Stage 3, the assessment stage, may foster rapid adoption of
the innovation, often driven by market demand. Individual
providers may be learning the nuances of the technique, but
the innovation has the perception of no longer being experi-
mental. RCTs during this stage are ideal but often may be
impractical. If the innovation has clear advantages without
foreseeable bias, then RCT may be unnecessary or unethical,
and attempts at performing such a trial would run into com-
plicating factors of recruitment. When RCTs are not feasible,
then alternative study designs may be implored which carry
more weight than case series – such as parallel group non-­
randomized studies.
   In stage 4, the long-term outcomes are assessed including
any late complications or indications not originally included
or those needing modification. Long-term patient benefit
with the innovation should be assessed head-to-head with the
prior standard of care. This proposed outline of safe introduc-
tion of technology shows inspiration from the systematic
approach to the introduction of pharmaceuticals. Since the
introduction of the IDEAL framework, modifications and
applications have been made to it which encourage its appli-
cability to different subsets of technology and different
patient populations [22, 23]. Marcus et al. describe a new
algorithm for assessment of surgical technology that expe-
dites the process locally while maintaining an environment
that is patient centered [24]. Quality outcomes and informed
consent are a priority, and a streamlined process makes it a
reality conducive to encouraging surgical innovation. Moving
beyond device or technology safety and efficacy, procedural
specialties have unique challenges inherent to the providers
themselves – challenges not encountered in new drug devel-
opment: the learning curve.
400   K. Lak

Unique Challenges: Surgeon Learning Curve

Inherent to the safe introduction of new innovation in sur-
gery is the training and proficiency of those using the technol-
ogy. Accounting for a learning curve is difficult, as criteria for
proficiency are lacking. Ideally, providers would be outside of
their learning curve during a comparative trial; however, this
could ultimately delay ability to perform trials for innovation
on a timely basis. Barrie et al. assessed the methods for deter-
mining surgeon learning curves for comparative analysis of
laparoscopic- and robotic-assisted colectomies for colorectal
cancer in efforts to define competency [25]. In this analysis,
nearly one-third of laparoscopic studies used a single quali-
fier to determine competency – often an arbitrary number of
cases performed by the surgeon, a defined operative case
time or plateau in case time, or a case-conversion rate.
Another one-third of studies used multiple parameters to
define the learning curve, and others used cumulative sum
(CUSUM) analysis. It is interesting to note that CUSUM
analysis demonstrated that case number to competency was
largely variable with some providers demonstrated to be
competent in as few as 5 cases and others at as high as 310
cases. This variability highlights the unreliable nature of a
single value such as case number in the assessment of surgeon
competency. Operative time alone is a difficult marker of
proficiency as faster operations do not necessarily correlate
with better patient outcomes [25]. As surgeons progress in
their skills, they also may be more likely to take on more chal-
lenging cases, and operative time may reflect patient proper-
ties rather than surgeon technique. This is also the problem
when conversion to open is used as a marker of surgeon
proficiency. Additional challenges in proficiency are seen
when surgical trainees are engaged.
   When looking at laparoscopic rectal cancer or robotic-
assisted procedures, the cases required to achieve proficiency
vary and likely depend on factors that are not tracked well in
databases – such as training methods and mentorship. A
study published in Harvard Business Review in 2001 followed
            Chapter 20.   Safe Introduction of Technology   401

cardiac surgeons as they adopted a new minimally invasive
technique [26]. After completion of the same 3-day training
sessions, the teams were followed on their surgical times over
the course of the first 50 cases. Analyzing the data from 16
teams at respected institutions around the country, what was
evident was that the learning curve was vastly different
between teams. Experience did not equal speed of adoption –
as a surgeon early in their practice was among the highest-
achieving, fast learning curve. This study highlighted factors
associated with fast adoption and found that a team-based
approach was paramount and likely synergistic to surgeons’
technical proficiency with the technology.
    Accurate and thorough reporting of outcomes despite
inevitable learning curves is necessary for transparency and
for accurate assessment of the data. What makes this con-
founding factor challenging is the variable duration of learn-
ing curve between providers based on the innovation at hand.
Monitoring results over time, especially in the event of new
technology, can be done with the CUSUM. Definitions of
failures and successes, their acceptable rates, and the false-­
positive and false-negative probabilities are made and agreed
upon prior to initiation. These variables are then tracked over
time from the moment the innovation is introduced allowing
for oversight [27].
    In the presidential address by Dr. Ralph Damiano for the
International Society for Minimally Invasive Cardiothoracic
Surgeons he describes physician groups taking responsibility
for patient quality and safety by stating that if this is left to
industry, the FDA, or individual surgeon discretion, then mul-
tifaceted conflicts of interest or burdensome bureaucracy can
put our patients at risk.


Conclusion
In this age of innovation, we have discussed examples of fast
adoption of surgical technology. Laparoscopic cholecystec-
tomy is only one example of widespread change in main-
402   K. Lak

stream surgical practice that occurred without rigorous
scientific study. While its use is now substantiated, the poten-
tial patient harm in its early phases warrants careful examina-
tion of our practices and modifications and safeguards to
prevent this from recurring. With the widespread minute to
minute dissemination of ideas, knowledge, and experience, a
new challenge has arisen as new innovation in the operating
room may all too often bypass a peer-reviewed process.
Surgeons with good intentions may look to adopt new meth-
ods, without the rigor of science proving their utility, safety,
and efficacy over time. Damiano et al. warn against the cycle
of innovation, fast adoption, and subsequent discrediting
after systematic data collection [27]. As the ultimate burden
for patient outcomes falls on the surgeon, it is our responsibil-
ity to wield prudence and tempered decision-making when it
comes to surgical innovation that makes it to the operating
room. Use of virtual reality, simulation, didactic courses, men-
torship, and preceptorship may be some of the methods used
and will depend on the type of innovation. We owe our
patients a systematic, but expeditious, assessment process to
ensure the safety of our patients as novel and promising
therapies are introduced.


References
 1. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy - a SAGES Wiki Article.
    Accessed 30 Nov 2020. https://www.sages.org/wiki/
    laparoscopic-­cholecystectomy/.
 2. Gollan JL, Bulkley GB, Diehl AM. Gallstones and laparoscopic
    cholecystectomy. JAMA J Am Med Assoc. 1993;269(8):1018–24.
    https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.1993.03500080066034.
 3. Strasberg SM, Ludbrook PA. Who oversees innovative practice?
    Is there a structure that meets the monitoring needs of new
    techniques? J Am Coll Surg. 2003;196(6):938–48. https://doi.
    org/10.1016/S1072-­7515(03)00112-­1.
 4. Shamiyeh A, Wayand W. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy: early
    and late complications and their treatment. Langenbecks
    Arch Surg. 2004;389(3):164–71. https://doi.org/10.1007/
    s00423-­0 04-­0470-­2.
              Chapter 20.     Safe Introduction of Technology         403

 5. Tang CL, Schlich T. Surgical innovation and the multiple mean-
    ings of randomized controlled trials: the first RCT on minimally
    invasive cholecystectomy (1980–2000). J Hist Med Allied Sci.
    2017;72(2):117–41. https://doi.org/10.1093/jhmas/jrw027.
 6. SAGES/MIRA consensus document on robotic surgery - a
    SAGES Publication. Accessed 14 Oct 2020. https://www.sages.org/
    publications/guidelines/consensus-­document-­robotic-­surgery/.
 7. Rutledge R, Fakhry SM, Baker CC, Meyer AA. The impact of
    laparoscopic cholecystectomy on the management and outcome
    of biliary tract disease in North Carolina: a statewide, population-­
    based, time-series analysis. J Am Coll Surg. 1996;183(1):31–45.
 8. Quick Safety 3: potential risks of robotic surgery | The Joint Com-
    mission. Accessed 30 Nov 2020. https://www.jointcommission.org/
    resources/news-­and-­multimedia/newsletters/newsletters/quick-­
    safety/quick-­safety-­issue-­3-­potential-­risks-­of-­robotic-­surgery/
    potential-­risks-­of-­robotic-­surgery/.
 9. Pradarelli JC, Campbell DA, Dimick JB. Hospital credentialing
    and privileging of surgeons: a potential safety blind spot. JAMA
    J Am Med Assoc. 2015;313(13):1313–4. https://doi.org/10.1001/
    jama.2015.1943.
10. Pradarelli JC, Thornton JP, Dimick JB. Who is responsible for
    the safe introduction of new surgical technology?: An important
    legal precedent from the da vinci surgical system trials. Surgery.
    2017;152(8):717–8. https://doi.org/10.1001/jamasurg.2017.0841.
11. Chen R, Rodrigues Armijo P, Krause C, Siu KC, Oleynikov
    D. A comprehensive review of robotic surgery curriculum and
    training for residents, fellows, and postgraduate surgical edu-
    cation. Surg Endosc. 2020;34(1):361–7. https://doi.org/10.1007/
    s00464-­0 19-­06775-­1.
12. Intuitive | Products Services | Education Training.Accessed 30 Nov
    2020. https://www.intuitive.com/en-­us/products-­and-­services/
    da-­vinci/education#.
13. RobotiX Mentor | Simbionix. Accessed 30 Nov 2020. https://
    simbionix.com/simulators/robotix-­mentor/.
14. Barkun JS, Aronson JK, Feldman LS, Maddern GJ,
    Strasberg SM. Evaluation and stages of surgical i­nnovations.
    Lancet. 2009;374(9695):1089–96. https://doi.org/10.1016/
    S0140-­6736(09)61083-­7.
15. Sweet BV, Schwemm AK, Parsons DM. Review of the processes
    for FDA oversight of drugs, medical devices, and combination
    products. J Manag Care Pharm. 2011;17(1):40–50. https://doi.
    org/10.18553/jmcp.2011.17.1.40.
404    K. Lak

16. Biffl WL, Spain DA, Reitsma AM, et al. Responsible devel-
    opment and application of surgical innovations: a posi-
    tion statement of the Society of University Surgeons. J Am
    Coll Surg. 2008;206(6):1204–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
    jamcollsurg.2008.02.011.
17. Belmont. The Belmont Report. In: Office of the Secretary; 1979.
18. McCulloch P, Altman DG, Campbell WB, et al. No surgi-
    cal innovation without evaluation: the IDEAL recommenda-
    tions. Lancet. 2009;374(9695):1105–12. https://doi.org/10.1016/
    S0140-­6736(09)61116-­8.
19. Horton R. Surgical research or comic opera: questions, but few
    answers. Lancet. 1996;347(9007):984–5. https://doi.org/10.1016/
    S0140-­6736(96)90137-­3.
20. Altman DG. Better reporting of randomised controlled trials:
    the CONSORT statement. Br Med J. 1996;313(7057):570–1.
    https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.313.7057.570.
21. Vandenbroucke JP, von Elm E, Altman DG, et al. Strengthening
    the reporting of observational studies in epidemiol-
    ogy (STROBE): explanation and elaboration. PLoS Med.
    2007;4(10):e297. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.0040297.
22. Schwartz JAT. Innovation in pediatric surgery: the surgical
    innovation continuum and the ETHICAL model. J Pediatr Surg.
    2014;49(4):639–45. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2013.12.016.
23. Sedrakyan A, Campbell B, Merino JG, Kuntz R, Hirst A,
    McCulloch P. IDEAL-D: a rational framework for evaluating
    and regulating the use of medical devices. https://doi.org/10.1136/
    bmj.i2372.
24. Marcus RK, Lillemoe HA, Caudle AS, et al. Facilitation of
    surgical innovation: is it possible to speed the introduction
    of new technology while simultaneously improving patient
    safety? Ann Surg. 2019;270(6):937–41. https://doi.org/10.1097/
    SLA.0000000000003290.
25. Barrie J, Jayne DG, Wright J, Murray CJC, Collinson FJ, Pavitt
    SH. Attaining surgical competency and its implications in sur-
    gical clinical trial design: a systematic review of the learning
    curve in laparoscopic and robot-assisted laparoscopic colorectal
    cancer surgery. Ann Surg Oncol. 2014;21(3):829–40. https://doi.
    org/10.1245/s10434-­0 13-­3348-­0.
26. Speeding Up Team Learning. Accessed 18 Oct 2020. https://hbr.
    org/2001/10/speeding-­up-­team-­learning.
27. Damiano RJ. Surgical innovation in the information age the
    heavy burden of great potential; 2011.
        Part III
Surgical Safety
Chapter 21
Quality, Safety,
and the Electronic Health
Record (EHR)
Eunice Y. Huang and Gretchen Purcell Jackson



Electronic health records (EHRs) have experienced increased
adoption over the last several decades, prompted by advances
in health information technologies; growth in requirements
for documentation and quality reporting, which can be sup-
ported by EHRs; and regulatory pressures, such as the Health
Information Technology for Economic Clinical Health
(HITECH) Act, which provided first incentives for




E. Y. Huang
Departments of General and Thoracic Surgery, Monroe Carell
Jr. Children’s Hospital at Vanderbilt, Nashville, TN, USA
e-mail: eunice.huang@vumc.org
G. P. Jackson (*)
Departments of General and Thoracic Surgery, Monroe Carell
Jr. Children’s Hospital at Vanderbilt, Nashville, TN, USA
Intuitive Surgical, Sunnyvale, CA, USA
e-mail: gretchenpurcell@stanfordalumni.org

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature   407
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_21
408   E. Y. Huang and G. P. Jackson

implementation and then penalties for failure to achieve
Meaningful Use of EHRs. While EHRs have shown promise
in the ability to support quality and safety in surgical special-
ties, significant challenges remain. This chapter provides an
overview of how EHRs can be leveraged to determine and
improve the quality and safety of surgical care.


Best Practices for EHR Implementation
Implementation and maintenance of EHRs are complex
endeavors that require full engagement of organizational
leadership and the healthcare personnel who work within the
environment. Substantial investments in hardware, software,
and technical support are necessary. Furthermore, workflow
redesign, employee education, and ongoing process evalua-
tions and adjustments should be expected. Implementation of
an EHR presents opportunities to improve effective and
efficient delivery of patient care, which can enhance quality
and safety. However, if poorly planned and executed, the
implementation process can also negatively impact quality
and safety in both inpatient and outpatient settings. This sec-
tion will discuss principles for surgeons to follow during EHR
implementation.
   An EHR implementation process can be divided into
three phases: pre-implementation, implementation, and post-­
implementation [1]. Surgeons should actively seek to be inte-
gral members of the leadership team and participate in all
three phases. To support such engagement, organizational
leadership should create time for and appropriately compen-
sate individuals who contribute to this critical undertaking.
Without appropriate representation, the unique needs and
workflows of surgical practice can be overlooked or misun-
derstood, with disruptive consequences when the EHR is
launched.
   The pre-implementation focus is developing an institu-
tional framework for the project, including articulating institu-
tional strengths, weaknesses, needs, and priorities. In addition,
        Chapter 21.   Quality, Safety, and the Electronic…   409

creating operating procedures for communication, identifying
outcome measurements, and articulating deliverables and
timelines are necessary. During implementation, surgeons
should engage in workflow redesign. This process involves
specifying existing workflows, adapting them to appropriate
EHR workflows, and elucidating the technical and structural
requirements for implementation and transition. This process
may involve numerous iterations, as surgeons work across
highly varied settings, from operating rooms, ambulatory sur-
gery centers, and endoscopy suites to clinics, emergency
departments, and intensive care units. After initial design,
surgical leaders should participate actively in testing the EHR
environment, address critical errors and oversights, and engage
in the training of their peers [2]. During post-implementation,
surgical leaders should track adoption, assess outcomes, assist
in optimization, and support adaptations to the ever-changing
healthcare environment.
   Effective health information technology leaders must have
expertise in EHR implementation and management, knowl-
edge of evolving technologies and associated regulations, and
awareness of privacy and security threats. Maintaining compe-
tence across these dimensions can be challenging. Developing
a workforce of surgeon clinical informaticists who have practi-
cal clinical experience and formal informatics training is of
great value to the surgical community and can enable optimal
utilization of all technologies, including EHRs [3].


 everaging the EHR to Measure
L
and Optimize Quality and Safety
EHRs provide many opportunities to deliver knowledge, stan-
dardize care, reduce errors, measure compliance, and track
quality in surgical practice. Examples include using visual cues
on patient dashboards to inform medication dosing [4], creat-
ing electronic pathways to direct complex care across multiple
encounters [5], and supporting rapid capture and delivery of
quality improvement data to improve compliance [6].
410   E. Y. Huang and G. P. Jackson

    Implementation, management, and use of EHRs are
accompanied by significant institutional administrative and
financial burdens. Therefore, it is important to continually
assess whether EHRs are delivering on the promise of pro-
viding higher quality and safer care to patients. Several stud-
ies have evaluated the global impact of EHR adoption and its
effects on quality and patient safety in surgery. Furukawa
examined the association of hospital EHR implementation
and adverse event occurrence rates using the Medicare
Patient Safety Monitoring System. In patients admitted for
acute cardiovascular disease, pneumonia, or conditions
requiring surgery, those exposed to a fully electronic EHR
were less likely to experience inhospital adverse events [7]. A
systematic review was conducted by Robinson to assess the
impact of EHRs, computerized physician order entry (CPOE),
and patient portal adoption on surgical practice, and it identi-
fied three trends with use of these EHR-supported technolo-
gies: improvements in the quality of surgical documentation,
increased adherence to guidelines for medication administra-
tion, and enthusiastic adoption of communication technolo-
gies such as patient portals [8]. Another systematic review by
Borab found that computerized clinical decision-support
systems increased the likelihood of ordering appropriate
venous thromboembolism prophylaxis and reduced the
occurrence of thromboembolic events [9]. A systematic
review and meta-analysis performed by Campanella showed
that, when properly implemented, EHRs can improve
­healthcare quality, increase efficiency and guideline adher-
 ence, and reduce medication errors and adverse drug events
 [10]. These studies provide compelling evidence of the quality
 and safety benefits that EHR adoption can offer in surgical
 specialties.
    One emerging area of research is the use of artificial intel-
 ligence techniques, such as natural language processing and
 machine learning, to support identification or automatically
 determine measures of quality and safety within EHRs. Data
 registries and surveillance systems, such as the American
 College of Surgeons National Surgical Quality Improvement
        Chapter 21.   Quality, Safety, and the Electronic…   411

Program (NSQIP), have been the foundation of quality and
safety initiatives in surgery. These approaches are limited in
scalability as they require time-consuming and costly manual
abstraction and data entry, which can be prone to inconsisten-
cies and errors. Quality criteria, such as the Agency for
Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) Patient Safety
Indicators (PSIs), utilize diagnostic codes, which are easily
collected from EHRs and administrative databases to iden-
tify adverse events. However, the quality of medical coding is
highly variable, and it is not always possible to determine
from a diagnostic code whether the condition was present on
admission or acquired during hospitalization [11].
    Surgeons have taken several approaches leveraging
advance analytics and artificial intelligence to identify quality
and safety metrics. Hu and colleagues developed machine
learning models that predicted surgical complications includ-
ing site infections, urinary tract infections, pneumonia, sepsis,
and shock, with high specificity, based on structured EHR
data [12, 13]. Murff and colleagues used natural language
processing to identify surgical complications including acute
renal failure requiring dialysis, pulmonary embolism, deep
vein thrombosis, sepsis, pneumonia, and myocardial infarc-
tion from textual notes and reports in a comprehensive EHR
across six Veterans Health Administration medical centers
[14]. This system identified most of these complications with
significantly higher sensitivity but lower specificity than
AHRQ PSIs, which are based on discharge diagnostic codes.
Bucher and colleagues developed a surveillance system that
analyzed computerized orders entered from days 2 to 30 after
a procedure to detect postoperative complications including
superficial, deep, and organ-space surgical site infections, uri-
nary tract infections, pneumonia, sepsis, septic shock, deep
venous thrombosis requiring treatment, and pulmonary
embolus [15]. This approach was able to identify individual
complications with a negative predictive value of 98.7–100%,
and it performed well for both inpatient and outpatient pro-
cedures. This methodology was proposed as an initial screen-
ing process to reduce the burden of manual review.
412   E. Y. Huang and G. P. Jackson

   Although these approaches hold some promise in the use
of analytics and artificial intelligence to support measure-
ment of quality and safety, there remain barriers to wide-
spread adoption. First, these approaches require
comprehensive EHRs with high-quality data. Second, such
algorithms may depend on organizational data structures and
local documentation conventions, and thus, their perfor-
mance may not necessarily be able to be replicated at other
institutions. Third, the lack of inter-operability of EHRs sig-
nificantly holds back the transfer of information between
health systems, and if that problem were solved, the artificial
intelligence burden would be significantly lessened. Fourth,
many care providers document using “free text” fields, rather
than mapping to coding systems such as ICD-10, CPT, or
SNOMED, leading to a lower discovery rate of the informa-
tion. Finally, algorithm performance varies and may not yet
be sufficient to replace manual processes. Nonetheless, these
approaches have the potential to augment human abstractors
and decrease the burden of manual review.


I mproving Surgeon-Patient Communication
 Using the EHR
Effective communication is critical to the successful delivery
of safe, high-quality medical care. Many organizations have
used functionalities within or in combination with their EHR
to support communication between surgeons and their
patients, including solutions for telemedicine and patient por-
tals. Telemedicine or telehealth, defined as the use of infor-
mation technology to deliver clinical healthcare from a
distance [16], has been modestly embraced by surgeons and
patients. Telemedicine has been shown to be an effective tool
for delivering postoperative care, to have high patient and
physician satisfaction, and to reduce cost for patients [17].
Recently, telemedicine has experienced a dramatic growth in
use as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Telemedicine vis-
its have allowed patients to interact with their surgeons while
         Chapter 21.   Quality, Safety, and the Electronic…     413

minimizing risks for infection [18]. A recent survey study
showed that the public viewed telemedicine as an acceptable
substitute for in-person visits and would choose that option
over an in-person visit during the pandemic [19]. Nevertheless,
a greater number of respondents still preferred in-person
interactions for surgical consultation outside the context of
the pandemic. The reasons cited were the desire to meet their
surgeon in person and to have the surgeon examine them
prior to surgery. Although telemedicine may be a robust tool
for some aspects of surgical care, it is unlikely to fulfill all the
needs of the surgeon-patient relationship.
   Patient portals are health-related online applications that
allow patients to access their health information and to inter-
act with healthcare organizations. Patient portal adoption
increased markedly as a result of the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 and the implementation of
Meaningful Use. Most EHR solutions offer patient portals,
which typically include a secure messaging functionality that
enables patients to exchange messages with healthcare pro-
viders. Although patient portals were initially developed for
primary care and medical specialties, several studies have
shown avid adoption by surgical patients and providers [20,
21]. Analyses of portal messaging between surgeons, patients,
and their caregivers have shown rich interactions, with most
exchanges involving the delivery of medical care, including
addressing new or worsening problems, adjusting treatment
plans, requesting new consultations, and scheduling testing or
therapeutic procedures [22, 23].
   There is a growing evidence that use of patient portals
through EHRs can enhance the quality and safety of surgical
care. In a cohort of patients undergoing elective general sur-
gery procedures, a combination of online surveys and patient
portal communications was employed for postoperative fol-
low-­up [24]. Most patients were satisfied with this method of
online follow-up; such visits took less time, and no complica-
tions were missed. In a study of patients undergoing orthope-
dic surgery procedures, patient portal use was associated with
lower no-show rates and increased satisfaction [25]. In urol-
414   E. Y. Huang and G. P. Jackson

ogy patients, patient portal users compared with nonusers
had decreased rates of postoperative emergency department
visits, unscheduled clinic encounters, and surgical complica-
tions [26].
   Several studies have shown significant racial and socioeco-
nomic disparities in adoption of patient portals in surgical
patients [21, 27], highlighting the need to ensuring that such
technologies do not exacerbate health inequities in access to
and quality of care. A systematic review assessing barriers to
portal adoption identified negative attitudes (in both patients
and providers), interface challenges, lack of appropriate
training, and privacy concerns [28]. The most common solu-
tions included promotion of increased computer and Internet
access, targeted marketing toward disadvantaged populations
to articulate benefit, and redesign and standardization of
portal interfaces.


Summary
EHRs are now widely adopted in surgical practice and offer
numerous opportunities for enhancing the quality and safety
of surgical practice. To maximally leverage these technologies
for quality and safety, comprehensive and widely adopted
EHRs with high-quality data are needed. Surgeons should be
actively engaged in EHR design, implementation, and
­maintenance to ensure surgical needs and perspectives are
 represented. A growing body of evidence suggests that once
 adopted, use of EHRs and their associated technologies can
 reduce adverse events, increase guideline adherence, and
 improve the quality of surgical documentation. Advanced
 analytics and artificial intelligence techniques are showing
 promise in the ability to automate or augment manual pro-
 cesses for identifying measures of quality and patient safety
 in surgery. Communication technologies often delivered
 through or integrated with EHRs, such as telehealth applica-
 tions and patient portals, offer attractive alternatives to in-­
 person care. Some evidence suggests that patient portal
         Chapter 21.   Quality, Safety, and the Electronic…      415

interactions can enhance satisfaction, decrease urgent or
emergent postoperative visits, and improve patient outcomes.
Well-trained surgeon informaticians are critical to optimizing
the implementation and utilization of EHRs to support qual-
ity care and patient safety.


Selected Reading
 1. Irizarry T, Barton AJ. A sociotechnical approach to successful
    electronic health record implementation: five best practices for
    clinical nurse specialists. Clin Nurse Spec. 2013;27(6):283–5.
 2. Aguirre RR, et al. Electronic health record implementation: a
    review of resources and tools. Cureus. 2019;11(9):e5649.
 3. Zhao J, et al. The value of the surgeon informatician. J Surg Res.
    2020;252:264–71.
 4. Hincker A, et al. Electronic medical record interventions and
    recurrent perioperative antibiotic administration: a before-and-­
    after study. Can J Anaesth. 2017;64(7):716–23.
 5. Austrian JS, et al. The financial and clinical impact of an elec-
    tronic health record integrated pathway in elective colon surgery.
    Appl Clin Inform. 2020;11(1):95–103.
 6. Fisher JC, et al. A novel approach to leveraging electronic health
    record data to enhance pediatric surgical quality improvement
    bundle process compliance. J Pediatr Surg. 2016;51(6):1030–3.
 7. Furukawa MF, et al. Electronic health record adoption and rates
    of in-hospital adverse events. J Patient Saf. 2020;16(2):137–42.
 8. Robinson JR, Huth H, Jackson GP. Review of information tech-
    nology for surgical patient care. J Surg Res. 2016;203(1):121–39.
 9. Borab ZM, et al. Use of computerized clinical decision sup-
    port systems to prevent venous thromboembolism in surgical
    patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA Surg.
    2017;152(7):638–45.
10. Campanella P, et al. The impact of electronic health records on
    healthcare quality: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur J
    Pub Health. 2016;26(1):60–4.
11. Romano PS, et al. Validity of selected AHRQ patient safety
    indicators based on VA National Surgical Quality Improvement
    Program data. Health Serv Res. 2009;44(1):182–204.
416    E. Y. Huang and G. P. Jackson

12. Hu Z, et al. Accelerating chart review using automated methods
    on electronic health record data for postoperative complications.
    AMIA Annu Symp Proc. 2016;2016:1822–31.
13. Hu Z, et al. Automated detection of postoperative surgical
    site infections using supervised methods with electronic health
    record data. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2015;216:706–10.
14. Murff HJ, et al. Automated identification of postoperative
    complications within an electronic medical record using natural
    language processing. JAMA. 2011;306(8):848–55.
15. Bucher BT, et al. Use of computerized provider order entry
    events for postoperative complication surveillance. JAMA Surg.
    2019;154(4):311–8.
16. Telehealth. [cited 2021 March 14, 2021]; Available from: https://
    www.ama-­assn.org/topics/telehealth.
17. Huang EY, et al. Telemedicine and telementoring in the surgical
    specialties: a narrative review. Am J Surg. 2019;218(4):760–6.
18. Contreras CM, et al. Telemedicine: patient-provider clinical
    engagement during the COVID-19 pandemic and beyond. J
    Gastrointest Surg. 2020;24(7):1692–7.
19. Sorensen MJ, et al. Telemedicine for surgical consultations - pan-
    demic response or here to stay?: a report of public perceptions.
    Ann Surg. 2020;272(3):e174–80.
20. Cronin RM, et al. Growth of secure messaging through a patient
    portal as a form of outpatient interaction across clinical special-
    ties. Appl Clin Inform. 2015;6(2):288–304.
21. Shenson JA, et al. Rapid growth in surgeons’ use of secure mes-
    saging in a patient portal. Surg Endosc. 2016;30(4):1432–40.
22. Riera KM, et al. Care delivered by pediatric surgical specialties
    through patient portal messaging. J Surg Res. 2019;234:231–9.
23. Robinson JR, et al. Complexity of medical decision-making in
    care provided by surgeons through patient portals. J Surg Res.
    2017;214:93–101.
24. Kummerow Broman K, et al. Postoperative care using a secure
    online patient portal: changing the (inter)face of general surgery.
    J Am Coll Surg. 2015;221(6):1057–66.
25. Varady NH, d’Amonville S, Chen AF. Electronic patient por-
    tal use in orthopaedic surgery is associated with disparities,
    improved satisfaction, and lower no-show rates. J Bone Joint
    Surg Am. 2020;102(15):1336–43.
26. Kachroo N, et al. Does “MyChart” benefit “my” surgery? A look
    at the impact of electronic patient portals on patient experience.
    J Urol. 2020;204(4):760–8.
         Chapter 21.    Quality, Safety, and the Electronic…      417

27. Wedd J, et al. Racial, ethnic, and socioeconomic disparities in
    web-based patient portal usage among kidney and liver trans-
    plant recipients: cross-sectional study. J Med Internet Res.
    2019;21(4):e11864.
28. Zhao JY, et al. Barriers, facilitators, and solutions to optimal
    patient portal and personal health record use: a systematic review
    of the literature. AMIA Annu Symp Proc. 2017;2017:1913–22.
Chapter 22
Checklists, Surgical
Timeout, Briefing,
and Debriefing: Safety
in the Operating Room
Amelia T. Collings and Dimitrios Stefanidis



It is no surprise that that the magnitude of healthcare perme-
ates the lives of hundreds of millions of Americans every year
and the benefits provided are unmeasurable. There were
883.7 million doctors’ office visits in 2016 and, in 2019, more
than 4.38 billion retail prescriptions were filled [1, 2].
According to the National Quality Forum (NQF), there was
a 300% increase in the number of procedures performed in
the United States from 1996 to 2006 [3]. In 2010, 51.4 million
surgical and nonsurgical procedures were performed [3].
Despite the innumerable benefits our healthcare system pro-
vides, it does not do so without considerable risk and even
some harm to patients. In 1999, the Institute of Medicine
released a landmark paper, reporting nearly 100,000 deaths
per year as a result of medical errors [4]. Never before had
medical errors been so publicly and comprehensively


A. T. Collings (*) · D. Stefanidis
Department of Surgery, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, IN, USA
e-mail: amroge@iu.edu; dimstefa@iu.edu

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature     419
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_22
420   A. T. Collings and D. Stefanidis

 reported. It stimulated a change in mindset to make medical
 errors a public health issue and called to fix system-wide
 errors. Surgery is not exempt from this problem. It is esti-
 mated that about 25–50% of all adverse events after surgery
 are due to medical errors [5, 6].
    A number of organizations are focused on improving
patient safety in healthcare. The NQF is an organization dedi-
cated to providing Americans with high-quality and safe
healthcare. It has developed a list of 28 “Serious Reportable
Events (SERs)” that colloquially are known as “Never
Events” and aim to prevent devastating iatrogenic injuries
(Table 22.1) [7]. These have been deemed reportable, grave in
nature, and largely preventable. The NQF’s goals are sup-
ported by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services
(CMS) which has significantly reduced reimbursements for
these events in an effort to attract attention to them and pro-
mote solutions [8]. Within the NQF’s surgical domain, there
are three main types of severe, yet preventable, events: wrong
site surgery, retained foreign bodies, and the death of an ASA
class I patient. The most commonly occurring errors are
wrong site surgery and retained foreign bodies. Wrong site
surgery also includes wrong patient and wrong side, in addi-
tion to wrong site.
    The Joint Commission was created to help organizations
increase their safety and reliability, and participating health-
care organizations are required to report certain sentinel
events. A sentinel event is defined as an incident that causes
death, permanent harm, or severe temporary harm and inter-
vention required to sustain life [9]. These sentinel events then
undergo root cause analyses to determine how and why the
errors occurred. From the results of root cause analyses,
­surgical timeouts were created to decrease error occurrence
 [9]. The Joint Commission defines a surgical timeout as “an
 immediate pause by the entire surgical team to confirm the
 correct patient, procedure, and site.” [10].
    Both retained foreign bodies and wrong site surgeries are
 considered sentinel events by the Joint Commission. In 2018,
 the Joint Commission had a total of 112 sentinel events
     Chapter 22.   Checklists, Surgical Timeout, Briefing…          421

Table 22.1 NQF’s serious reportable events
Surgical events
Surgery performed on the wrong body part
Surgery performed on the wrong patient
Wrong surgical procedure performed on a patient
Unintended retention of a foreign object in a patient after
surgery or other procedure
Intraoperative or immediately postoperative death in a ASA
class I patient
Product or device events
Patient death or serious disability associated with the use
of contaminated drugs, devices, or biologics provided by the
healthcare facility
Patient death or serious disability associated with the use or
function of a device in patient care in which the device is used
or functions other than as intended
Patient death or serious disability associated with intravascular
air embolism that occurs while being cared for in a healthcare
facility
Care management events
Patient death or serious disability associated with a medication
error (e.g., errors involving the wrong drug, wrong dose, wrong
patient, wrong time, wrong rate, wrong preparation, or wrong
route of administration)
Patient death or serious disability associated with a
hemolytic reaction due to the administration of ABO/HLA –
Incompatible blood or blood products
Maternal death or serious disability associated with labor or
delivery in a low-risk pregnancy while being cared for in a
healthcare facility
Patient death or serious disability associated with hypoglycemia,
the onset of which occurs while the patient is being cared for in
a healthcare facility
                                                          (continued)
422    A. T. Collings and D. Stefanidis

Table 22.1 (continued)
Death or serious disability (kernicterus) associated with failure
to identify and treat hyperbilirubinemia in neonates
Stage 3 or 4 pressure ulcers acquired after admission to a
healthcare facility
Patient death or serious disability due to spinal manipulative
therapy
Artificial insemination with the wrong donor sperm or wrong
egg
Environmental events
Patient death or serious disability associated with an electric
shock while being cared for in a healthcare facility
Any incident in which a line designated for oxygen or other
gas to be delivered to a patient contains the wrong gas or is
contaminated by toxic substances
Patient death or serious disability associated with a burn
incurred from any source while being cared for in a healthcare
facility
Patient death or serious disability associated with a fall while
being cared for in a healthcare facility
Patient death or serious disability associated with the use of
restraints or bedrails while being cared for in a healthcare
facility
Criminal events
Any instance of care ordered by or provided by someone
impersonating a physician, nurse, pharmacist, or other licensed
healthcare provider
Abduction of a patient of any age
Sexual assault on a patient within or on the grounds of a
healthcare facility
Death or significant injury of a patient or staff member
resulting from a physical assault (i.e., battery) that occurs within
or on the grounds of a healthcare facility
    Chapter 22.   Checklists, Surgical Timeout, Briefing…   423

reported for wrong site surgeries; however, due to underre-
porting, they estimated that these most likely occur as often
as 40–60 times per week across the nation [11, 12]. Furthermore,
in 2018, there were 131 retained foreign body events reported
[11]. These figures, although high, are likely underestimated
as oftentimes there is inconsistent reporting due to fear of
litigation. In addition, these incidents are not benign in
nature. In a 2018 study by Steelman et al., 308 patients with
unintentional retained foreign bodies were analyzed, and
they found almost 2% of patients had died as a direct result
of the foreign body [12]. In addition, almost half of foreign
bodies are discovered after the patient is discharged, leading
to increased inpatient days, additional procedures, and oppor-
tunities for more errors to occur [13].
    There are a multitude of factors that increase the risk of
these errors occurring. In 2009, after root cause analysis, the
Joint Commission identified 29 factors that contributed to
wrong site surgeries (Table 22.2) [14]. The top three factors of
both wrong site surgery and retained foreign bodies were
related to leadership, human factors, and communication [12,
15]. The variables that contribute to these sentinel events are
far reaching and diverse; they involve every aspect of the
continuum of patient care. Therefore, the solutions need to
include every participant involved in patient care and have
the perspective of a system-wide approach. Surgical teams
work in highly stressful environments. They experience many
interruptions, most often from equipment failures, and must
multitask while performing complex technical skills [16].
These interruptions increase both the workload and stress of
the entire surgical team [17]. This in turn negatively impacts
the technical skills of the surgeon [18].
    System-wide flaws leading to errors are not a unique prob-
lem to the medical field. Other complex, high-risk fields, such
as nuclear power and aviation, face similar issues and have
implemented checklists to decrease errors from human fac-
tors and poor communication [19]. Checklists help remind a
team of people of the minimum, routine steps required and
can help close the loop in communication and verify that
424    A. T. Collings and D. Stefanidis

Table 22.2 The Joint Commission’s 29 main causes of wrong site
surgery
Scheduling
1. Booking documents not verified by office schedulers
2. Schedulers accept verbal requests for surgical bookings
    instead of written documents
3. Unapproved abbreviations, cross-outs, and illegible
    handwriting used on booking form
4. Missing consent, history and physical, or surgeon’s orders at
    time of booking
Pre-op holding/holding
5. Primary documents (consent, history and physical, surgeon’s
    booking orders, operating room schedule) missing,
    inconsistent, or incorrect
6. Paperwork problems identified in pre-op but resolved in a
    different location
7. Inconsistent use of site marking protocol
8. Someone other than surgeon marks site
9. Surgeon does not mark site in pre-op/holding
10. Site mark made with non-approved surgical site marker
11. Stickers used in lieu of marking the skin
12. Inconsistent site marks used by physicians
13. Inconsistent or absent timeout process for regional blocks
14. Rushing during patient verification
15. Alternate site marking process does not exist or is not used
16. Inadequate patient verification by team
Operating room
17. Lack of intraoperative site verification when multiple
      procedures performed by the same provider
18. Ineffective hand-off communication or briefing process
     Chapter 22.   Checklists, Surgical Timeout, Briefing…         425

Table 22.2 (continued)
19. Primary documentation not used to verify patient,
     procedure, site, and side
20. Site mark(s) removed during prep or covered by surgical
     draping
21. Distractions and rushing during timeout
22. Timeout process occurs before all staff are ready or before
     prep and drape occur
23. Timeout performed without full participation
24. Timeouts do not occur when there are multiple procedures
     performed by multiple providers in a single operative case
Organization culture
25. Senior leadership is not actively engaged
26. Inconsistent organizational focus on patient safety
27. Staff is passive or not empowered to speak up
28. Policy changes made with inadequate or inconsistent staff
     education
29. Marketplace competition and pressure to increase surgical
     volume lead to shortcuts and variation in practice


pivotal jobs have been completed. For example, pilots and
flight attendants use checklists to verify engine readiness
before takeoff. Borrowing from that experience, many differ-
ent facets of healthcare have begun to adopt checklist tools
to prevent devastating errors.
    In 2002, the Veterans Affairs National Center for Patient
Safety developed a protocol called Ensuring Correct Surgery
[20]. This protocol employed a five-step process aimed at
reducing operations performed at the incorrect site and on
the incorrect patient or performing the incorrect procedure.
It starts with confirmation of the correct patient and correct
procedure during the consent process. Next, the operative site
is marked. Then, the patients themselves state multiple items
of identification (i.e., name, date of birth, social security num-
426        A. T. Collings and D. Stefanidis

ber, etc.). Next, two members of the team confirm the correct
imaging is readily available. Lastly, a timeout is performed
attesting that the previous steps have been completed and are
correct [20].
   In 2004, the Joint Commission developed the Universal
Protocol in an effort to decrease, if not eliminate completely,
wrong site surgeries (Fig. 22.1) [21]. The three main steps of
the Universal Protocol are preoperative verification process,
marking the operative site, and a timeout immediately before
the procedure. Their goal was to encourage communication
and thus improve teamwork leading to better outcomes. In
2010, with the results from a root cause analysis on wrong site
surgeries (Table 22.2), the Joint Commission expanded upon
their Universal Protocol and developed a program called
Safe Surgery. In this program, they offer solutions to the most
common causes of wrong site surgery in each of the four
phases of surgical care (scheduling, pre-op/holding, operating
room, organizational culture) [9].
   Each year surgical interventions contribute about 13% of
the world’s total disability-adjusted life years, and, in some
developing nations, the mortality rate from general anesthe-
sia can be as high as 1 in 150 [22]. Thus, the World Health
Organization (WHO) developed the first globally accepted


  Conduct a pre-procedure verificaiton process

  Address missing information or discrepancies before starting the procedure.

 • Verify the correct procedure, for the correct patient, at the correct site.
 • When possible, involve the patient in the verification process.
 • Identify the items that must be available for the procedure.
 • Use a standardized list to verify the availability of items for the procedure. (It is not necessary to
      document that the list was used for each patient.) At a minimum, these items include:
            relevant documentation
            Examples: history and physical signed consent form, preanesthesia assessment
            labeled diagnostic and radiology test results that are properly displayed
            Examples: radiology images and scans, pathology reports, biopsy reports
            any required blood products, implants, devices, special equipment

 • Match the items that are to be available in the procedure area to the patient.


Figure 22.1 The Joint Commission’s Universal protocol
     Chapter 22.          Checklists, Surgical Timeout, Briefing…                             427

 Mark the procedure site
 At a minimum, mark the site when there is more than one possible location for
 the procedure and when performing the procedure in a different location could
 harm the patient.
  For spinal procedures: Mark the general spinal region on the skin. Special intraoperative
  imaging techniques may be used to locate and mark the exact vertebral level.
  Mark the site before the procedure is performed.
  If possible, involve the patient in the site marking process,
  The site is marked by a licensed independent practitioner who is ultimately
  accountable forthe procedure and will be present when the procedure is
  performed.
  In limited circumstances, site marking may be delegated to some medical
  residents, physician assistants (P.A.), or advanced practice registered nurses
  (A.P.R.N.).
  Ultimately, the licensed independent practitioner is accountable for the
  procedure — even when delegating site marking.
  The mark is unambiguous and is used consistently throughout the organization.
  The mark is made at or near the procedure site.
  The mark is sufficiently permanent to be visible after skin preparation and
  draping.
  Adhesive markers are not the sole means of marking the site.
  For patients who refuse site marking or when it is technically or anatomically
  impossible or impractical to mark the site (see examples below): Use your
  organization's written, altemative process to ensure that the correct site is
  operated on. Examples of situations that involve altemative processes:
        mucosal surfaces or perineum
        minimal access procedures treating a lateralized internal organ, whether
        percutaneous or through a natural orifice
        teeth
        premature infants, for whom the mark may cause a permanent tattoo


Figure 22.1 (continued)
428     A. T. Collings and D. Stefanidis

 Perform a time-out
 The procedure is not started until all questions or concerns are resolved.

   Conduct a time-out immediately before starting the invasive procedure or making the incision.

   A designated member of the team starts the time-out.

   The time-out is standardized.

   The time-out involves the immediate members of the procedure team: the individual

   performing the procedure, anesthesia providers, circulating nurse, operating room

   technician, and other active participants who will be participating in the procedure

   from the beginning.

   All relevant members of the procedure team actively communicate during the time-out.

   During the time-out, the team members agree, at a minimum, on the following:

        correct patient identity

        correct site

        procedure to be done

   When the same patient has two or more procedures: Ifthe person performing the

   procedure changes, another time-out needs to be performed before starting each procedure.

   Document the completion of the time-out. The organization determines the amount and type

   of documentation.


Figure 22.1 (continued)


surgical safety checklist, in an effort to decrease unnecessary
surgical deaths and complications across the world in their
Safer Surgery Initiative [22]. Their tool is a 19-item checklist
involving three phases of care for a surgical patient: before
anesthesia, before skin incision, and before the patient leaves
the operating room (see Fig. 22.2 for complete details) [23].
Before implementation, the WHO’s Surgical Safety Checklist
was prospectively studied in a multi-institutional, multina-
tional study that included both developed and developing
nations. They showed a significant decrease in complications,
but, more importantly, decreased patient mortality rate by
almost 50% [24].
   Following the advent of these two landmark surgical safety
checklists, numerous iterations have been developed and
published. For example, in England and Wales, they use a
process called “Five Steps to Safer Surgery” (Table 22.3) [25].
        Chapter 22.                                Checklists, Surgical Timeout, Briefing…                                                                429




    Before induction of anaesthesia                               Before skin incision                   Before patient leaves operating room

   (with at least nurse and anaesthetist)               (with nurse, anesthetist and surgeon)            (with nurs, anaesthetist and surgeon)

   Has the patient confirmed his/her identity,              Confirm all team members have                Nurse Verbally Confirms:
   site, procedure, and consent?                            introduced themselves by name and role.
                                                                                                            The name of the procedure
       Yes                                                  Confirm the patient’s name, procedure,          Completion of instrument, sponge and needle
                                                            and where the incision will be make.            counts
   Is the site marked?
                                                        Has antibiotic prophylaxis been given within        Specimen labelling (read Specimen labels aloud,
       Yes
                                                        the last 60 minutes?                                including patient name)
       Not applicable
                                                            Yes                                             Whether there are any equipment problems to be
   Is the anaesthesia machine and medication                                                                addressed
                                                            Not applicable
   check complete?                                                                                       To Surgeon, Anaesthetist and Nurse:
       Yes                                              Anticipated Critical Events
                                                                                                            What are the key concerns for recovery and
   Is the pulse oximeter on the patient and                                                                 management of this patient?
                                                        To Surgeon:
   functioning?
                                                           What are the critical or non-routine steps?
       Yes
                                                            How long will the case take?
   Does the patient have a:                                 What is the anticipated blood loss?
   Known allergy?
                                                        To Anaesthetist:
       No                                                   Are there any patient-specific concerns?
       Yes
                                                        To Nursing Team:
   Difficult airway or aspiration risk?                    Has sterility (including indicator results)
                                                           been confirmed?
       No
                                                           Are there equipment issues or any concerns?
       Yes and equipment/assistance available
                                                        Is essential imaging displayed?
   Risk of >500ml blood loss (7ml/kg in children)?
       No                                                   Yes

       Yes and two IVs/central access and fluids            Not applicable
       planned




Figure 22.2 WHO surgical safety checklist


This checklist includes the concept of briefing and debriefing,
in addition to the surgical timeout. A briefing prepares the
team for the upcoming operation by verifying that all the
necessary equipment and personnel are available and attempt
at anticipating potential problems before they arise. A
debrief reviews aspects that did not go as anticipated, as dis-
cussed in the briefing, and brainstorm solutions for future
cases. The concept of debriefing originated in the military.
During World War II, S.L.A. Marshall noticed that while
recording the experiences of soldiers that they were able to
receive social support and ultimately emotional healing
through this process [26]. Marshall observed a restored sense
of cohesion in the unit and readiness to return to combat [26].
This has since been incorporated throughout all branches of
the military in an effort to decrease post-traumatic stress dis-
order. Briefing also has military roots. They have a specific,
predefined formula to communicate critical information in a
clear, concise manner [27]. The purpose of both a brief and
debrief is to flatten the slope of hierarchy, consequently creat-
ing an environment of open communication, free from fear of
reprisal.
Table 22.3 Five steps to safer surgery
                                                                                                                     430

Step            Timing of intervention              What to discuss (summary)    Comments/challenges
1. Briefing     Before list or each patient (if     Introduction of team/        Local arrangements will
                different staff for each patient,   individual roles             determine when the first patient
                e.g., emergency list)                                            on list is sent for May also
                                                                                 include aspects from steps 2 and
                                                                                 3
                                                    List order
                                                    Concerns relating to         Could be an opportunity to
                                                    staff/equipment/surgery/     discuss anticipated breaks during
                                                    anesthesia                   the list (e.g., lunch)
                                                                                 May be difficult to get the team
                                                                                                                     A. T. Collings and D. Stefanidis




                                                                                 together
2. Sign-in       Before induction of anesthesia     Confirm patient/procedure/   Aspects of step 3 may be done
                                                    consent form                 here
                                                    Allergies                    Surgical site marking should be
                                                                                 checked by the surgeon at this
                                                                                 point
                                                    Airway issues
                                               Anticipated blood loss
                                               Machine/medication check
3. Timeout   Before the start of surgery      In practice most of this
    (stop                                      information is discussed
                                                                                            Chapter 22.




    moment)                                    before, so this is used as a
                                               final check
              Team member introduction         Surgeons may use this
                                               opportunity to check that
                                               antibiotic prophylaxis has
                                               been administered
              Verbal confirmation of patient
              information
              Surgical/anesthetic/nursing
              issues
              Surgical site infection bundle
              Thromboprophylaxis
                                                                                            Checklists, Surgical Timeout, Briefing…




                                                                              (continued)
                                                                                            431
Table 22.3 (continued)
                                                                                                                 432


Step            Timing of intervention       What to discuss (summary)       Comments/challenges
                Imaging available
4. Sign out     Before staff leave theatre   Confirmation of recording       Should include all team members
                                             of procedure: Instruments,      (including surgeons and
                                             swabs, and sharp correct        anesthetists)
                                             Specimens correctly labelled
                                             Equipment issues addressed
                                             Postoperative management
                                             discussed and handed over
                                                                                                                 A. T. Collings and D. Stefanidis




5. Debriefing   At the end of the list       Evaluate list                   Can be difficult to gather people
                                                                             together to do this
                                             Learn from incidents            Evaluation of the list includes a
                                                                             discussion of what went well
                                             Remedy problems, e.g.,
                                             equipment failure
                                             Can be used to discuss five-­
                                             step process
    Chapter 22.   Checklists, Surgical Timeout, Briefing…    433

   During the briefing step, every member of the team intro-
duces themselves and their role. Concerns for the day or the
individual procedure are discussed, including equipment
needs, patient factors, or staffing issues. By taking the time to
brief as a team, a feeling of cohesion and equality is nurtured
so that every member feels comfortable to speak up if they
have concerns. During the debrief stage, the team again con-
venes to talk about the strengths and weaknesses of the day
or of an individual case. They discuss what went wrong and
why, in order to prevent that same issue from recurring.
   Numerous studies have shown that using a team-based,
preoperative checklist can not only decrease communication
failures but also decrease complications and even mortality
[24, 28, 29]. Lingard et al. prospectively studied a busy
Canadian hospital before and after initiating a preoperative
briefing session guided by a checklist. Overall the total num-
ber of communication failures observed decreased after
implementing the briefing session [28]. Furthermore, there
was a 64% reduction in communication failures with at least
one visible negative consequence [28]. Examples of negative
consequences included inefficiency, team tension, resource
waste, workaround, delay, patient inconvenience, and proce-
dural error. Likewise, Haynes et al. showed that use of the
WHO checklist significantly decreased both complications
and mortality in eight different institutions in eight different
countries (Canada, India, Jordan, New Zealand, Philippines,
United States, Tanzania, and United Kingdom) [24]. This
shows that even in a diverse set of cultural and socioeco-
nomic settings, the WHO Surgical Safety Checklist is able to
affect real change.
   Application of the Universal Protocol is mandatory to
receive accreditation by the Joint Commission, which in turn
results in reimbursements from CMS [30]. The Accreditation
Association for Ambulatory Health Care (AAAHC) certifies
ambulatory surgery centers and also mandates the use of
surgical timeout safety checklists. This accreditation is linked
with CMS reimbursements as well [31]. The American
College of Surgeons (ACS) recommends following the
434   A. T. Collings and D. Stefanidis

Universal Protocol and the WHO’s Safe Surgery Checklist in
order to deliver high-quality surgical care [32].
    Given that there has been extensive evidence supporting
the efficacy of checklists, timeouts, and briefs/debriefs, these
practices should be incorporated into every operating room.
It is important for surgeons to recognize that the goal of all
these approaches is to enhance patient safety by helping the
team prepare for and focus on the task at hand, minimize
ambiguity, and empower all team members to voice any con-
cerns that arise. Checklists ensure that all important elements
of the task have been addressed and none has been omitted
and timeouts ensure that the team is focused when checklist
and other items are being addressed. Briefings help prepare
teams for what to anticipate during task performance and
share a common mental model, while debriefs close the loop
by reviewing what happened and learning from any devia-
tions from the anticipated and errors that may have occurred
to minimize them in subsequent iterations of the same task.
    Utilization of checklists permeates multiple other areas of
medicine besides the operating room. In critical care, check-
lists were found to increase confidence in unfamiliar tasks,
but required a positive attitude by senior physicians for suc-
cessful implementation [33]. In emergency medicine, check-
lists have been shown to increase guideline compliance and
improve outcomes in airway management [34]. In addition,
checklists have been shown to increase the accuracy in hand-
off communication [35]. Lastly, checklists are used for more
than preventing sentinel events, but in fact improve surgical
care in other ways as well. They help increase compliance
with antibiotic timing, keep patients normothermic, and
decrease blood transfusions [36, 37].
    There are challenges to studying the efficacy of surgical
checklists and timeouts. Firstly, not only do results depend on
initiation and adherence, but murkier elements such as par-
ticipant attitude and initial culture of the institution influence
the results. In addition, wrong site surgeries and retained
foreign bodies are not common events and so require the
observation of a large number of procedures over time.
    Chapter 22.   Checklists, Surgical Timeout, Briefing…   435

Rarely are these studies powered adequately to detect the
change they are looking for. On the other hand, those that are
powered appropriately must be conducted over such a long
time period that their results are confounded by the changes
in practice patterns. Several systematic reviews have been
done analyzing the effectiveness of surgical checklists and
timeouts and the results are mixed. Although some studies
observed a decrease in complications and mortality, many
saw no change, and even some studies actually reported an
increase in complications [38, 39]. It appears that developing
nations and high-risk procedures are settings where check-
lists and timeouts have shown the greatest benefit [38, 39].
    Outside of research, even with the best of intentions, there
are challenges to implementing surgical safety checklists.
Several studies show that implementation and continued use
over time requires stakeholder involvement from the begin-
ning [40, 41]. In addition, adherence is dependent on the pres-
ence of all critical team members and their attention during
the timeout process [41]. With decreasing reimbursements
and increasing amounts of paperwork, surgeons are expected
to perform more procedures while having less time to do so.
Although this time pressure leads to increased errors, like
wrong site surgeries and retained foreign bodies, it also
makes the surgeon less likely to want to stop for a brief, time-
out, and debrief. Emergency operations create another com-
plicating factor in adherence to surgical timeouts. Further, the
repetitive, routine nature of the timeout can lead to compla-
cency, leaving the process open to preventable errors. Lastly,
execution of a new process requires a new mentality and,
subsequently, a change in culture. In order for the brief/
debrief to be effective, complete buy-in from all parties
involved is needed. It is not enough to tell people they are
free to speak up, unless they truly feel safe to do so. This
change in culture oftentimes comes from the leadership of
the team, which consequently is also one of the top reasons
for wrong site surgeries, according to the Joint Commission.
If the leadership of the operating room, most commonly the
attending surgeon, does not believe in the necessity or the
436   A. T. Collings and D. Stefanidis

importance of the surgical timeout, then the rest of the team
will follow suit.
   Each organization must address their specific barriers to
implementation and participation before they can expect to
change their culture of safety. Making sure that everyone
from the team is present and attentive before starting a time-
out or briefing is critical. This may mean waiting to drape the
patient or keeping the instruments away from the table until
the timeout has been completed. In addition, everyone needs
to feel that they can speak up, and this means listening and
acknowledging, without belittlement, every team member
when they speak. As we have discussed, issues with leader-
ship are a major cause of wrong site surgeries and retained
foreign bodies, thus with a commitment toward safety from
the leadership this is able to change. The rest of the team will
follow the example that is set by the primary surgeon.
   From an organizational perspective, patient safety has to
be critical to the mission, more so than productivity. They
should support their staff’s efforts to take the dedicated time,
unhurried and without distraction, in order to thoroughly
complete all the steps of the brief, pre-procedure verification,
timeout, and debrief. On average, a surgical timeout takes
about 60 sec to complete [42]. Policy should reflect this com-
mitment and they should invest in ample education for staff
on the importance and practicality of application. The
Association of periOperative Registered Nurses (AORN)
has developed, in conjunction with the Joint Commission, a
tool kit to help organizations implement the Universal
Protocol. It includes an educational component for staff,
resources for facilities to create their own policies, reference
tools, and patient education materials [43]. AORN has also
recommend involving patients and their families when mark-
ing the correct site and using a specified, indelible, unequivo-
cal marking of the correct site. AORN’s verification checklist
before surgery should include the following: verbal communi-
cation with the patient, complete medical record review,
review of informed consent and all available imaging, direct
observation of marked surgical site, and verbal verification
     Chapter 22.     Checklists, Surgical Timeout, Briefing…            437

with surgical team. Lastly, it is critical that quality control
initiatives be in place to monitor protocol compliance [44].
   Operating room teams work in high stress, high stakes
environments daily, and there are countless distractions on
their attention and time. So, even with the utmost attention to
detail, human errors including errors in communication
occur, and the results can be disabling or even life threaten-
ing. Therefore, it is in the best interest of the patients and the
members of the team to have systems in place that are reli-
able, effective, and safe. With a small investment in time and
energy, the implementation of surgical timeouts and briefs/
debriefs will not only improve the communication within the
operating room, but prevent devastating errors causing
patients real harm.


References
 1. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. FastStats - Physician
    Office Visits. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 10 Oct
    2019. www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/physician-­visits.htm.
 2. Shahbandeh M. Total number of retail prescrip-
    tions filled annually in the U.S. 2013–2025. Statista,
    28      Aug      2020.        www.statista.com/statistics/261303/
    total-­number-­of-­retail-­prescriptions-­filled-­annually-­in-­the-­us/.
 3. Surgery 2015–2017 Final Report. NQF: Surgery 2015–2017 Final
    Report, National Quality Forum, 20 Apr 2017. www.qualityfo-
    rum.org/Publications/2017/04/Surgery_2015-­2017_Final_Report.
    aspx.
 4. Kohn LT, et al. To err is human building a safer health system.
    Washington D.C., USA: National Academy Press; 2000.
 5. Krizek TJ. Surgical error: ethical issues of adverse events.
    Arch Surg. 2000;135(11):1359. https://doi.org/10.1001/
    archsurg.135.11.1359.
 6. Suliburk JW, et al. Analysis of human performance deficiencies
    associated with surgical adverse events. JAMA Netw Open.
    2019;2(7). https://doi.org/10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2019.8067.
 7. Serious Reportable Events in Healthcare–2006 Update.
    NQF: Serious Reportable Events in Healthcare–2006
    Update. National Quality Forum, 2007. www.qualityforum.
438        A. T. Collings and D. Stefanidis

      org/Publications/20 07/03/Serious_Reportable_Events_in_
      Healthcare%E2%80%932006_Update.aspx.
 8.   Fact Sheet ELIMINATING SERIOUS, PREVENTABLE, AND
      COSTLY MEDICAL ERRORS - NEVER EVENTS. CMS.gov,
      Centers for Medicare and Medicaid, 18 May 2006. www.cms.
      gov/newsroom/fact-­sheets/eliminating-­serious-­preventable-­and-­
      costlymedical-­errors-­never-­events.
 9.   Safe Surgery. Center for Transforming Healthcare.
      The        Joint        Commission. www.centerfortransforming-
      h e a l t h c a r e. o r g / i m p r o v e m e n t -­t o p i c s / s a f e -­s u r g e r y / ? _
      ga=2.92660317.1584263004.1596126705-­525192084.1596126705.
10.   Pellegrini C. Time-outs and their role in improving safety and
      quality in surgery. Bull Am Coll Surg. 2017. https://bulletin.facs.
      org/2017/06/time-outs-and-their-role-in-improving-safety-and-
      quality-in-surgery/.
11.   Summary Data of Sentinel Events Reviewed by the Joint
      Commission. The Joint Commission, The Joint Commission,
      1 July 2019. www.jointcommission.org/-­/media/tjc/documents/
      resources/patient-­s afety-­t opics/sentinel-­e vent/summary-­
      2q-­2019.pdf.
12.   Steelman VM, et al. Unintentionally retained foreign objects:
      a descriptive study of 308 sentinel events and contributing fac-
      tors. Jt Comm J Qual Patient Saf. 2019;45(4):249–58. https://doi.
      org/10.1016/j.jcjq.2018.09.001.
13.   Steelman VM, et al. Retained surgical sponges: a descriptive
      study of 319 occurrences and contributing factors from 2012
      to 2017. Patient Saf Surg. 2018;12(1) https://doi.org/10.1186/
      s13037-­0 18-­0 166-­0.
14.   Joint Commission identifies 29 main causes of wrong-site
      surgery, offers solutions. Becker’s ASC Review, 30 June 2011.
      www.beckersasc.com/asc-­accreditation-­and-­patient-­safety/joint-­
      commission-­identifies-­29-­main-­causes-­of-­wrong-­site-­surgery-­
      offers-­solutions.html.
15.   10 most common causes of wrong-site surgeries, according to the
      Joint Commission: Incidents involving wrong-patient, wrong-site
      or wrong-procedure errors were the sixth most common sentinel
      events reported to the Joint Commission last year. Becker’s
      Hospital Review. www.beckershospitalreview.com/quality/10-­
      most-­common-­causes-­of-­wrong-­site-­surgeries-­according-­to-­the-­
      joint-­commission.html.
16.   Göras C, et al. Tasks, multitasking and interruptions among
      the surgical team in an operating room: a prospective obser-
       Chapter 22.    Checklists, Surgical Timeout, Briefing…        439

      vational study. BMJ Open. 2019;9(5). https://doi.org/10.1136/
      bmjopen-­2018-­026410.
17.   Bretonnier M, et al. Interruptions in surgery: a comprehensive
      review. J Surg Res. 2020;247:190–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
      jss.2019.10.024.
18.   Arora S, et al. The impact of stress on surgical performance: a
      systematic review of the literature. Surgery, 2010;147(3). https://
      doi.org/10.1016/j.surg.2009.10.007.
19.   Systems approach. PSNet, AHRQ, 7 Sept 2017. psnet.ahrq.gov/
      primer/systems-­approach.
20.   VA.gov: Veterans Affairs. Ensuring Correct Surgery, 5 Dec 2013.
      www.patientsafety.va.gov/media/correctsurg.asp.
21.   The universal protocol for preventing wrong site, wrong proce-
      dure, and wrong person surgery. The Joint Commission, www.
      jointcommission.org/-­/media/tjc/documents/standards/universal-­
      protocol/up_poster1pdf.pdf.
22.   Safe Surgery. World Health Organization, World Health
      Organization, 13 June 2017, www.who.int/patientsafety/topics/
      safe-­surgery/en/.
23.   “Implementation manual surgical safety checklist.” World
      Alliance for Patient Safety, The World Health Organization,
      2008., www.who.int/patientsafety/safesurgery/tools_resources/
      SSSL_Manual_finalJun08.pdf?ua=1.
24.   Haynes AB, et al. A surgical safety checklist to reduce mor-
      bidity and mortality in a global population. N Engl J Med.
      2009;360(5):491–9. https://doi.org/10.1056/nejmsa0810119.
25.   Vickers R. Five steps to safer surgery. Ann R Coll Surg Engl.
      2011;93(7):501–3. https://doi.org/10.1308/147870811x599334.
26.   Koshes R, et al. Debriefing following combat. In: Jones FD, edi-
      tor. War psychiatry. Office of the Surgeon General, United States
      Army; 1995. p. 271–90.
27.   United States, Congress, Marine Corps Training Command.
      Military briefing W3S0005 student handout, United States
      Marine Corps, pp. 1–14.
28.   Lingard L. Evaluation of a preoperative checklist and team
      briefing among surgeons, nurses, and anesthesiologists to reduce
      failures in communication. Arch Surg. 2008;143(1):12. https://doi.
      org/10.1001/archsurg.2007.21.
29.   Mazzocco K, et al. Surgical team behaviors and patient out-
      comes. Am J Surg. 2009;197(5):678–85. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
      amjsurg.2008.03.002.
440    A. T. Collings and D. Stefanidis

30. State Recognition. The Joint Commission, 2020. www.jointcom-
    mission.org/accreditation-­and-­certification/state-­recognition/.
31. Ambulatory Surgery Centers (ASCs). AAAHC, 2020. www.
    aaahc.org/accreditation/ambulatory-­surgery-­centers-­ascs/.
32. American College of Surgeons (ACS) Committee on
    Perioperative Care. Revised statement on safe surgery checklists,
    and ensuring correct patient, correct site, and correct procedure
    surgery. American College of Surgeons. 2016. www.facs.org/
    about-­acs/statements/93-­surgery-­checklists.
33. Thomassen Ø, et al. Checklists in the operating room: help
    or hurdle? A qualitative study on health workers’ experi-
    ences. BMC Health Serv Res. 2010;10(1). https://doi.
    org/10.1186/1472-­6963-­10-­342.
34. Chen C, et al. Use and implementation of standard operating
    procedures and checklists in prehospital emergency medicine: a
    literature review. Am J Emerg Med. 2016;34(12):2432–9. https://
    doi.org/10.1016/j.ajem.2016.09.057.
35. Jullia M, et al. Training in intraoperative handover and display
    of a checklist improve communication during transfer of care.
    Eur J Anaesthesiol. 2017;34(7):471–6. https://doi.org/10.1097/
    eja.0000000000000636.
36. Haugen AS, et al. Causal analysis of World Health Organizationʼs
    surgical safety checklist implementation quality and impact on
    care processes and patient outcomes. Ann Surg. 2019;269(2):283–
    90. https://doi.org/10.1097/sla.0000000000002584.
37. White MC, et al. Sustainability of using the WHO surgical
    safety checklist: a mixed-methods longitudinal evaluation fol-
    lowing a nationwide blended educational implementation strat-
    egy in Madagascar. BMJ Glob Health. 2018;3(6). https://doi.
    org/10.1136/bmjgh-­2018-­0 01104.
38. De Jager E, et al. Postoperative adverse events inconsistently
    improved by the World Health Organization surgical safety
    checklist: a systematic literature review of 25 studies. World J Surg.
    2016;40(8):1842–58. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00268-­0 16-­3519-­9.
39. Lagoo J, et al. Effectiveness and meaningful use of paediat-
    ric surgical safety checklists and their implementation strate-
    gies: a systematic review with narrative synthesis. BMJ Open.
    2017;7(10). https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-­2017-­0 16298.
40. Van Schoten SM, et al. Compliance with a time-out procedure
    intended to prevent wrong surgery in hospitals: results of a
    National Patient Safety Programme in the Netherlands. BMJ
    Open. 2014;4(7). https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-­2014-­0 05075.
     Chapter 22.   Checklists, Surgical Timeout, Briefing…       441

41. Schwendimann R, et al. Adherence to the WHO surgical
    safety checklist: an observational study in a Swiss Academic
    Center. Patient Saf Surg. 2019;13(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/
    s13037-­0 19-­0 194-­4.
42. Russ S, et al. Measuring variation in use of the WHO surgical
    safety checklist in the operating room: a multicenter prospective
    cross-sectional study. J Am Coll Surg. 2015;220(1). https://doi.
    org/10.1016/j.jamcollsurg.2014.09.021.
43. Mulloy D. Wrong-site surgery: a preventable medical error. In:
    Hughes R, editor. Patient safety and quality: an evidence-based
    handbook for nurses. Agency for Healthcare Research and
    Quality, U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services; 2008.
44. AORN Develops Correct Site Surgery Kit. Imaging
    Technology News, 4 June 2007. www.itnonline.com/content/
    aorn-­develops-­correct-­site-­surgery-­kit.
Chapter 23
Creating Effective
Communication
and Teamwork for Patient
Safety
Pascal Fuchshuber and William Greif




 ffective Communication Within a Culture
E
for Patient Safety
   Healthcare culture does not support high performing teamwork
   (…and culture eats strategy for lunch) (IHI)

Patient safety culture exists within a conducive set of behav-
ioral norms. Teamwork and effective communication are part
of a multidimensional framework that determines safety cul-
ture and ultimately the quality of care (Figs. 23.1 and 23.2).
Good teamwork and effective communication rely on mutual
respect, problem solving, and sharing of ideas. Without these


P. Fuchshuber (*)
Sutter East Bay Medical Group, UCSF-East Bay,
Oakland, CA, USA
W. Greif
The Permanente Medical Group, Kaiser Walnut Creek Medical
Center, Walnut Creek, CA, USA
e-mail: William.Greif@kp.org

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature   443
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_23
444    P. Fuchshuber and W. Greif

                                    Safety culture



                                         Prevent
                                          harm



                                        Patient
                                       Centered
                                         Care
                          Improve                    Identify and
                                                     mitigate
Teamwork and                                                             Reliable
communication                                                            design

                                Leadership

Figure 23.1 Delivering safe care – Institute for Healthcare Improvement
model (IHI Boston Patient Safety Officers Curriculum, 2010)


      The top 5 most commonly identified contributing factors
                 of preventable adverse outcomes

                              Poor communications                        Knowledge
   Performance deficit                                                   deficit




“Anticipated”
  adverse
  outcome
                                                     Failure to follow
                                                     procedures

          Unworkable, unintelligible, or incorrect procedures

Figure 23.2 Effective communication is one of the five basic tools
to prevent patient harm. (Source – 2009 SERCIT report on Care
and Treatment (Emily Sandelin, CO; Mark Littlewood, Permanente
Federation; Doug Bonacum, Dept Care and Service Quality))

essential elements, care cannot be delivered in a safe and reli-
able way. Unfortunately, this dynamic is far from being the
norm in today’s healthcare environment. Many healthcare
providers – especially physicians – lack deep understanding
of good communication skills and ignore opportunity to
        Chapter 23. Creating Effective Communication…        445

improve when they fall short. Today, many members of
healthcare teams will admit that their ability to communicate
is hindered and that they would be hesitant to point out mis-
takes made by their leaders (again in particular physicians)
even though they judge good teamwork by their ability to
speak up. Conversely, physicians see good teamwork and
communication as the ability and effectiveness to tell others
what to do and get it done.
    This chapter describes how to overcome these barriers and
use the tools of effective communication as the basis for
delivery of safe patient care. Failed communication is the
most common reason for harm to the recipient of healthcare.
In the context of a clinical setting, effective communication is
the accurate transfer of information between two or more
providers. Communication fails when it is incomplete, inef-
fective, or inappropriate. The result is patient harm, i.e., sub-
standard care because of missing and inadequate information.
The importance of understanding why this happens and what
is the context of communication within healthcare organiza-
tions cannot be overemphasized.
    The primary root causes of failed communications are (1)
poor handoffs, i.e., the failure to read back and confirm the
information given, (2) the inability to share information due
to fear of authority and retaliation, and (3) the assumption
that outcome and safety of care is as expected and does not
need to be checked.
    The most important foundation of effective communica-
tion is one that (1) fosters an environment that promotes
consistent high-quality care, (2) is free of retaliation and
blame, (3) encourages learning from mistakes, and (4)
­supports interactions between patients, families, and provid-
 ers within a safe, satisfying, and rewarding workplace.
    There are many reasons why these are difficult to achieve
 within a healthcare organization. Briefly, some of the funda-
 mental and pervasive issues are as follows:
(a) Teamwork – Clinical medicine is a very complex environ-
    ment with quickly changing parameters, unpredictability,
    incomplete data, and frequent task interruptions. Building
    on teamwork does largely mitigate the negative impact of
446     P. Fuchshuber and W. Greif

      these circumstances, thus the strong impetus to build a
      team approach to patient safety and care delivery.
(b)   Leadership – Failure of leadership to recognize the
      importance and prioritize the implementation of effec-
      tive communication and teamwork.
(c)   Training – Failure to create and train providers to form
      teams that can effectively interact and are accountable
      for maintaining effective communication skills.
(d)   Culture – Creating “buy-in” and the organizational value
      for team approaches over individual expert-thinking, par-
      ticularly among healthcare providers steeped in auton-
      omy and lacking effective leadership training.
(e)   Hierarchy/psychological safety – Psychological safety is a
      belief that one will not be punished or humiliated for
      speaking up with ideas, questions, concerns, or mistakes.
      Hierarchical barriers are inherent to healthcare systems
      based on vertical authority and prevent people from
      “speaking-up” when a decision is questionable, or a prob-
      lem arises. Effective leadership by a surgeon should
      emphasize “flat hierarchy” by (1) using a person’s name,
      (2) sharing the plan of action, (3) inviting other team
      members to participate in the communication, and (4)
      asking people directly to share questions or concerns.
         Psychological safety matters most in systems with a
      rapidly changing knowledge base, a high need for collab-
      oration, and a short decision time – classic attributes of a
      modern healthcare organization.
(f)   Lack of structure – Absence of processes that include a
      structured “handoff” template to ensure completeness of
      information, maintain respect for all participants, and
      ensure engagement in effective communication.
(g)   Abusive and disrespectful behavior – Failure to create a
      culture of universal mutual respect leads to increased risk
      as recognized in the Joint Commission “Sentinel Event
      Alert” [1]: “Intimidating and disruptive behavior can fos-
        Chapter 23. Creating Effective Communication…        447

    ter medical errors, contribute to poor patient satisfaction
    and to preventable adverse outcomes, increase the cost of
    care, and cause qualified clinicians, administrators, and
    managers to seek new positions in more professional envi-
    ronments.” For example, if a surgeon loses his or her tem-
    per in the OR and treats the team with disrespect,
    leadership must intervene and ensure psychological safety
    for the members of the team. This is best done by timely
    intervention and demonstrating that disrespectful behav-
    ior is not tolerated within the organization. The CEO,
    Chief Medical Officer, or Patient Safety Officer is respon-
    sible for reinforcing desired behavior with disregard to the
    vertical hierarchy of the team. For example, a surgeon
    behaving rudely and disrespectful in the OR is required to
    apologize to the team and nursing staff as soon as possible.
    This “culture” requires the leadership to adhere to funda-
    mental common and nonnegotiable principles of interper-
    sonal communication and behavior made transparent and
    clear to all members of the healthcare team.
(h) Setting the tone – Negative Example: A surgeon runs into
    the OR loudly announcing that he has a meeting he cannot
    miss in 3 hours and a whole lot of cases to do. “Get going!”
    Setting the stage and tone occurs within a few seconds
    from the beginning of a verbal communication and has a
    profound effect on the effectiveness of communication. It
    is an important, trainable leadership skill for the surgeon
    [2]. Ideally, the surgeon as a leader tries to create a posi-
    tive tone immediately by greeting each person by name
    and setting the stage by communicating that the common
    value is the care of the patient, the team effort, and
    respectful, open collaboration. Nonnegotiable mutual
    respect in every interaction every day and accessibility,
    humility, and determination to get things done right are
    key elements of a successful surgeon team leader.
448   P. Fuchshuber and W. Greif

 tructured Communication, Handoffs,
S
and SBAR – The Tools of the Trade
In order to assure effective communication in situations
where specific and complex information must be exchanged
and acted upon in a timely manner, structured communica-
tion techniques become essential tools. Below is a brief list of
such structured communication tools with a description of
their definition and use. Some of these tools are described in
more detail in other chapters of this manual:
(a) Briefings – concise exchange of information essential to
    operational effectiveness involving others by (1) asking
    for their input, (2) using first names to encourage famil-
    iarity and lower barriers to speak up, and (3) making eye
    contact and facing the other person to reinforce their
    contribution and value. Briefings are most effective in
    procedural areas (OR, ICU, ambulatory care, etc.). It may
    be difficult to gain “buy-in” for briefings in the OR, par-
    ticularly from surgeons inherently adverse to interfer-
    ence with what they perceive as their “realm.” Getting
    physician support for briefings may be facilitated by
    team-training exercises in the OR, by showing the par-
    ticular provider how briefings will increase the likelihood
    for an effective day in the OR (correct equipment, more
    engagement by other team members, faster turnaround)
    and greater patient safety by ensuring correct side sur-
    gery and consequently lower malpractice risk.
(b) Debriefings –should occur at the end of procedures to
    allow learnings from what happened during the process
    and set the stage for the next procedure. Briefings and
    debriefings depend on each other and both should be as
    specific and detailed as possible. Typical debriefing
    questions:
    • What was the procedure? Wound classification?
    • Are specimens correct?
    • What went well?
    • What could have gone better?
         Chapter 23. Creating Effective Communication…    449

    •   What are the next steps for this patient?
    •   What did we learn?
    •   How did we document (specimen, wound class, etc.)?
    •   What do we need for the next case?
(c) Assertive Language – this refers to a communication for
    members of the team to “speak up” and to state the infor-
    mation with appropriate persistence until there is resolu-
    tion. The lack of assertive language skills may lead to
    patient harm, particularly when it is paired with the per-
    vasive vertical authority encountered in healthcare orga-
    nizations. It is known that up to 40% of nurses report
    hesitance to speak up about mistakes in Safety Attitude
    Questionnaires. Because of these barriers, information is
    typically communicated in an unclear, oblique, and indi-
    rect manner with a “hint of hope that what I said must
    have been heard” and “something didn’t seem right, but a
    proposed action did not occur.” Effective assertion does
    not mean aggressive and confrontational communication
    but rather a polite form of making sure one is heard in a
    timely and clear manner. Training and practice among
    team members in assertive language can be very helpful.
    A typical checklist to help understand the meaning and
    technique of assertive language is shown here:
    • Get the attention of the other(s).
    • Use names.
    • Use eye contact.
    • Face the other person.
    • State the problem concisely.
    • State your concern.
    • Propose an action.
    • Recheck if concern and action were understood.
    • Reassert if necessary.
    •  Expect a decision that is understood by all members of
        the team.
    • Escalate if no result.
       Assertive communication skills can be trained and are
    very helpful in creating a culture of safety and effective
    communication.
450   P. Fuchshuber and W. Greif

(d) Critical Language – briefly, this is the ability to use lan-
    guage during a stressful and dangerous situation to avert
    patient harm. Again, this will work best if a flattened hier-
    archy has already been established. Typical sentences to
    illustrate this type of language are “I am concerned/
    scared,” “may I have a little clarity,” or “let’s hold for a
    minute and make sure we are all on the same page.”
    Ultimately, this may translate into “excuse me, doctor, but
    I need some clarity about which breast you are going to
    do the mastectomy...” after the fourth or fifth breast case
    of the day One can easily imagine the potential benefit of
    critical language used by a nurse when a tired surgeon is
    about to operate on the wrong side, when a flattened hier-
    archy has been established.
(e) Common Language – this communication tool describes
    a specific language around a specific event of clinical set-
    ting that is adopted and understood by all team members.
    It creates a “benchmark” of how to communicate around
    certain events. A good example is the standardized termi-
    nology and language describing fetal heart rates by the
    National Institute of Child Health and Human
    Development (NICHD). This assures good understand-
    ing by all providers in the clinical setting of the fetal heart
    tracing [3]. An agreed upon language around checklists
    and timeout procedures is another example of the use of
    common language to assure reliable and effective
    communication.
(f) Closed Communication Loops – it consists of the use of
    read-back, whereby the recipient repeats back the con-
    cisely stated information by the sender and the sender in
    turn acknowledges the read-back. Corrections are made
    as necessary to the communicated content. This type of
    communication is mandatory when critical content can-
    not be lost, for example, when communicating in a dan-
    gerous and complex environment such as a nuclear
    submarine. Think of clinical settings as equivalent to that
    of a submarine; for example, use read-back when con-
    firming the sponge count, giving telephone orders for
        Chapter 23. Creating Effective Communication…           451

    medications, or confirming consent and operative site.
    This is recognized by the Joint Commission which
    requires a read-back process for verbal or telephone
    orders as defined in the National Patient Safety Goals [2].
(g) Callouts – surgeons commonly use this communication
    technique in the OR to clearly indicate the timeline of the
    procedure in progress. Callouts should be communicated
    in clearly and loudly spoken simple phrases so that all
    team members can understand and hear. Good examples
    are “we are closing,” “we are having difficulty and will
    convert to open procedure in 5 minutes,” “we will be clos-
    ing in 15 minutes,” “start the sponge count,” and “I will
    need the ultrasound machine in 30 minutes.”
(h) Handoffs – “Gentlemen, it is better to have died as a small
    boy than to fumble this football” – John Heisman (1869–
    1936). Handoffs or the transfer of information from one
    team to another is an essential part of effective communica-
    tion. This occurs innumerable times each day in hospitals,
    offices, and laboratories. These critical moments of transi-
    tion of care are prone to error and can be dangerous as each
    handoff carries the potential for information loss or misin-
    terpretation. Errors at the time of transition of care are
    among the most common and consequential errors in
    healthcare. Handoffs occur between different providers
    (change of shift in the ER, change of call provider on the
    floor) or can involve the physical location change of a
    patient (transfer from floor to ICU, from hospital to skilled
    nursing facility, discharge home). The key for a successful
    handoff is accuracy and completeness, preferably through
    standard protocols. Common aspects of a good handoff are
    interaction, timeliness, appropriate information content,
    review of r­ elevant data, and lack of interruptions. To achieve
    that goal, it is helpful to designate specific times and loca-
    tions for handoffs to minimize distraction, cover all possible
    scenarios, and use structured language and checklists.
    Within the National Patient Safety Goals, the Joint
    Commission requires a structured process for patient hand-
    offs. Table 23.1 depicts a simple mnemonic for a safe and
    effective handoff [4].
452        P. Fuchshuber and W. Greif

Table 23.1 Mnemonic for safe and effective handoffs: “ANTICipate”
Administrative:  Name and location of patient
New information:       Update of clinical situation, brief H+P,
                       problem list, meds, current status, significant
                       events
Tasks:                 To-do list (use “if/then” statements)
Illness:               Assessment of the severity of current illness
Contingency            Prepare cross coverage for best way to
plan(s):               manage based on what did and did not work
                       in the past
Modified from [4]

(i) SBAR         (Situation,      Background,       Assessment,
    Recommendation) – SBAR is a communication tech-
    nique using a standardized template similar to the SOAP
    model (subjective/objective/assessment/plan) as shown
    in Table 23.2. It can be used in verbal and written com-
    munications to set the expectations within a dialogue. Its
    structure assures that relevant and critical informational
    content is communicated every time a patient or an issue
    is discussed. It forces the communicators to acknowledge
    the goals of all involved parties – as they may diverge. For
    example, physicians tend to focus on problem solving
    (“what do I need to do” – “in a nutshell, this is the prob-
    lem”), while nurses are trained to be narrative and
    descriptive. They may need to understand the background
    and more specific aspects of the problem. Similarly, when
    used in a performance improvement project, written
    communication by SBAR will concisely communicate the
    fundamental framework and context of a project and
    describe its goal and how to achieve it (Table 23.2). To be
    effective and enhance predictability of the communica-
    tion, SBARs need to be crisp and to the point and pro-
    mote critical thinking.
            Chapter 23. Creating Effective Communication…                                      453

Table 23.2 SBAR – Situation, Background, Assessment,
Recommendation. A situational briefing tool. Three examples in
clinical practice
S – Situation: What is this about? Establish the topic of the com-
munication (punch line)
B – Background: What information is needed; why are we talk-
ing about this? (context)
A – Assessment: Describe and state the problem/situation
(patient status, problem)
R – Recommendation: What should we do? When are we doing it
(clarify action)?
Kaiser Permanente, SBAR (Situation, Background, Assessment,
Recommendation) Tool, 2002
SBAR – a technique for communicating critical information
that requires immediate attention and action concerning a
patient’s condition
Situation – What is going on with the patient? “I am calling
about Mrs. Joseph in room 251. Chief complaint is shortness of
breath of new onset.”
Background – What is the clinical background or context?
“Patient is a 62-year-old female post-op day 1 from abdominal
surgery. No prior history of cardiac or lung disease.”
Assessment – What do I think the problem is? “Breath sounds
are decreased on the right side with acknowledgment of pain.
Would like to rule out pneumothorax.”
Recommendation – What would I do to correct it? “I feel
strongly the patient should be assessed now. Are you available
to come in?”.
Source: Institute for Healthcare Improvement. Guidelines for com-
municating with physicians using the SBAR process. http://www​.ihi.
o r g / I H I ​ / To p i c s / P a t i e n t S a f e t y ​ / S a f e t y G e n e r a l / To o l s ​ /
SBARTechniqueforCommunicationASituationalBriefingModel​
.htm. Accessed Sept 14, 2020
Clinical examples for SBAR:
S – State patient name and call out problem: “Doctor, I am worried
about Ms. Flagherty’s wound. I think it is infected.”
B – State the pertinent medical history and treatment to date: “She
is diabetic and had a colon resection 2 days ago.”
A – What is your assessment and what is the clinical picture: “I am
concerned because her wound is red and she had a high temperature
and chills last night.”
                                                                                    (continued)
454    P. Fuchshuber and W. Greif

Table 23.2 (continued)
R – State what you would like to see done: “I think she needs her
wound to be opened. I need you to come and see her.”
S – “Jim, I know you are getting ready to wake up the patient, but
the instrument count is wrong.”
B – “We looked and counted two times, but it is still incorrect. We
need to find the missing instrument.”
A – “The count is incorrect; thus, we need an X-ray.”
R – “Don’t wake the patient up until we have done the X-ray and
the radiologist has seen it. Let’s get the film now.”
Performance improvement example for SBAR:
S – Finding the standard for surgical prep solution to reduce surgical
site infections.
B – We do not have a standard for adult surgical skin prep solutions.
Evidence suggest solutions A and B are superior than Y and Z.
A – The most common prep solution we use is Y and Z. Infection
rate is measurably less when using prep solutions A and B.
R – Use of prep solutions A and B for all adult skin prep. Eliminate
solutions Y and Z from OR and procedure rooms. Exceptions listed.




   In addition to the above list of communication tools, orga-
nizations may want to use communication structures such as
multidisciplinary rounds and red rules.
   Multidisciplinary rounds assemble all members of the care
team for walk rounds on each patient. Teams are encouraged
to use structured communication tools such as SBAR and
briefings to enhance their ability to effectively speak to each
other about the current care issues. The success of such mul-
tidisciplinary rounds depends largely on the ability of the
leadership to create a culture of safety and flattened hierar-
chy that gives every team member the confidence to speak
up. Further, such tools can effectively allow the healthcare
team to present a unified plan of care to the patients, who are
often confused and frustrated by multidisciplinary failures in
communication.
   Red rules are adopted from the nuclear power industry to
provide nonnegotiable rules when necessary. In a healthcare
        Chapter 23. Creating Effective Communication…        455

environment, these might be “always do a time-out,” “always
check sponge count before closing,” “always wash hands
before and after entering a patient’s room”. These hard rules
need to have the “buy-in” of everybody, should be nonam-
biguous, and carry immediate consequences for violating
them. Because of this stringent normative setting, the number
of red rules within an organization should be limited.
   Structured communications, handoffs, and SBARs are part
of effective teamwork and communication skills that are not
inherent to the nature of healthcare providers. They require
specific training and practice that should be provided by any
healthcare organizations striving for best outcomes in patient
care and safety. Specific teamwork training sessions should
include all members of a care team and be led by a trained
professional (e.g., Institute of Health Improvement-trained
Patient Safety Officer). Key elements of these training ses-
sions are realistic scenarios to provide education on team
behavior, communication strategies, and safe culture. Essential
attributes of a team include nonnegotiable mutual respect,
inclusiveness of all concerns and acknowledgment of failure,
thrive for excellence, conflict resolution, and use of structured
communication tools. Assessment of effective communica-
tion provides critical feedback, and observation of team cli-
mate, behavior, and work is essential to continued
improvement (see Chap. 26 on Culture of Safety and 28 on
Team Training).


Rapid Response Team
The purpose of a rapid response team (RRT) is to assemble
a team of experts around the bedside of a patient within min-
utes anytime there is a concern because:
• A staff member is worried
• There is an acute change in vital signs such as change in
  systolic blood pressure (<90), heart rate (<40 >130), and
  respiratory rate (<8 >30)
456   P. Fuchshuber and W. Greif

• There is an acute change in oxygen saturation <90%
• There is a change in mental status
• There is drop in Urine Output to <50 mL in 4 hours
   The team consists typically of a hospitalist or intensivist,
an ICU nurse, and a respiratory therapist. The team can be
called upon by anyone involved in the patient’s care includ-
ing clinicians, nurses, patients, and family members, whenever
the patient meets certain criteria posted throughout the
hospital.
   The role of the RRT is to:
• Assess the health status of the patient
• Stabilize the patient
• Communicate with all involved healthcare providers and
  nurses
• To make sure the primary attending is notified
• Provide support and expertise for the staff caring for the
  patient
• Assist with transfer to a higher level of care when
  necessary
   Good RRTs are allotted time by their organization to
make rounds on all patients assigned to them so potential
problems and harm can be anticipated and acted upon. It
helps foster a good relationship between floor staff and the
RRT. Use of the RRT should be encouraged. Essentially,
there is no “bad” reason to call on the RRT, and the willing-
ness of the team to help in any situation should never be
called into question. The characteristic of a good RRT is a
positive attitude: always ask, “how can I help?” with a smile!
This is increasingly important as nursing shortages, inexperi-
enced staff, and the higher acuity of inpatients in hospitals
today have created the need for rapid availability of care
expertise at the bedside of a deteriorating patient. By creat-
ing an RRT, organizations can provide patients the care they
need when they need it [5].
       Chapter 23. Creating Effective Communication…        457

Good Teamwork Through Collaboration
A key strategy to achieve patient safety is to take advantage
of the complimentary roles of the providers within the
healthcare team. Forming a collaborative approach and for-
mulating goals that include the diverse responsibilities and
problem-solving abilities of each healthcare team member
accomplishes several important objectives [6]:
1. Increase awareness of each other, thereby strengthening
   the team’s efficiency and impact.
2. Make siloed knowledge and skills available to everybody
   on the team.
3. Improve the final decision-making through integration of
   the inherent team diversity.
   Ultimately, collaboration adds another pillar besides trust
and respect to the effectiveness of teamwork. In healthcare,
this is equivalent to an interdisciplinary approach to the prob-
lem of patient safety. Interdisciplinary should not be confused
with multidisciplinary. Again, the former is used to integrate
diverse approaches and cultures within the team for the bet-
terment, whereas the latter subdivides the team in separate
areas of responsibility and task assignment.
   From a patient perspective, the communication with a
team that has integrated through collaboration is much easier
and effective. Likewise, a collaborative team will excel at for-
mulating an individual care approach for each patient that
considers all facets of safety and optimization.
   In order to achieve good collaboration, all team members
should be made aware of the many barriers to interdisciplin-
ary communication. The most important are (1) understand-
ing personal expectations and principles and (2)
acknowledging hierarchical structures; (3) ethnic and gener-
ational differences; (4) gender, language, and professional
and status differences; (5) fears regarding loss of autonomy,
identity, and situational safety; and (6) hidden biases due to
differences in payment and rewards.
458   P. Fuchshuber and W. Greif

    Good teamwork communication through collaboration is
characterized by open communication in a tolerant, nonpuni-
tive environment. Each team member needs to be assigned
direction and roles that are clear, well defined, and known to
all others. When a fair balance of assignments and shared
responsibility is established, respect and mutual support
come easy. Hierarchy within the team must be outlined
clearly and understood by everyone. Regular feedback and
audits should be implemented and discussed regularly.
Appropriate access to resources should be verified and
assured [7–9].
    One of the earliest and most influential realizations that
effective team management is the basis for safety and com-
munication is the development of the Crew Resource
Management (CRM) safety training in aviation in 1979 [10].
In a landmark study by Sexton et al., the leanings of this pro-
gram were studied on and applied to operating room teams
[11]. Out of this came the VA Palo Alto Health Care System
and Stanford-led Anesthesia Crisis Resource Management
(ACRM) model and adoption of CRM by the Kaiser
Permanente Medical Group [12, 13]. Many other hospital
systems have since adopted and modified CRM to their spe-
cific system and studied outcomes. In summary, the adoption
of the CRM model to healthcare has led to the development
and design of blame-free, nonpunitive approaches to safety
processes and procedures. Debriefing of all safety events and
extracting improvement strategies from near misses and
never-events has become standard to good healthcare safety
practice. Ongoing risk identification, compliance training,
redundant and standardized checklists, and implementation
of prevention programs are now common goals of any health-
care system trying to achieve effective communication for
patient safety.
        Chapter 23. Creating Effective Communication…            459

References
 1. Joint Commission Sentinel Event Alert 40, 9 July 2008. http://
    www.jointcommission.org/sentinelevents/sentineleventsalert/
    sea_40.htm.
 2. Mazzocco K, Petitti DB, Fong KT, et al. Surgical team behaviors
    and patient outcomes. Am J Surg. 2009;197(5):678–85.
 3. Fox M, Kilpatrick S, King T, et al. Fetal heart rate monitoring:
    interpretation and collaborative management. J Midwifery
    Womens Health. 2000;45(6):498–507.
 4. Vidyarthi AR. Triple handoff. AHRQ WebM&M (ersial online),
    September 2006. Available at: http://www.webmm.ahrq.gov/
    case/aspx?caseID=134.
 5. Joint Commission Resources. Best practices in medical emer-
    gency teams. Oakbrook Terrace: The Joint Commission; 2006.
 6. O’Daniel M, Rosenstein AH. Chapter 3: Professional commu-
    nication and team collaboration. In: Hughes RG, editor. Patient
    safety and quality: an evidence-based handbook for nurses.
    Rockville: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (US);
    2008.
 7. Baldwin DC. The role of interdisciplinary education and
    teamwork in primary care and health care reform. Rockville:
    Bureau of Health Professions, Health Resources and Services
    Administration; 1994. Order No 92–1009.
 8. Hackman JR, editor. Groups that work (and those that don’t):
    creating conditions for effective teamwork. San Francisco:
    Jossey-Bass; 1990.
 9. Bernard M, Connelly R, Kuder LC, et al. Interdisciplinary edu-
    cation. In: Klein S, editor. A national agenda for geriatric edu-
    cation: white papers. Rockville: Bureau of Health Professions
    Health Resources and Services Administration; 1995. p. 57–80.
10. Cooper GE, White MD, Lauber JK. Resource management
    on the flight deck: proceedings of a NASA/industry workshop,
    NASA Conference Publication No. CP-2l20. Moffett Field:
    NASA-Ames Research Center; 1980.
11. Sexton JB, Thomas EJ, Helmreich RL. Error, stress, and team-
    work in medicine and aviation: cross sectional surveys. BMJ.
    2000;320:745–9.
460    P. Fuchshuber and W. Greif

12. Howard SK, Gab DM, Fish KJ, et al. Anesthesia crisis resource
    management training: teaching anesthesiologists to handle criti-
    cal incidents. Aviat Space Environ Med. 1992;63:763–70.
13. Leonard M, Graham S, Bonucom D. The human factor: the
    critical importance of effective teamwork and communication
    in providing safe care. Qual Saf Health Care. 2004;13(Suppl
    1):185–90.



Selected Reading
Edmondson AC. Learning from failure in health care: frequent
   opportunities, pervasive barriers. Qual Saf Health Care.
   2004;13(Suppl II):ii3–9. https://doi.org/10.1136/qshc.2003.009597.
Frankel A, Leonard M, Simmonds T, Haraden C, Vega B. The essen-
   tial guide for patient safety officers. Institute for Healthcare
   Improvement, Joint Commission Resources; 2009.
Haig KM, Sutton S, Whittington J. SBAR: a shared mental model for
   improving communication between clinicians. Jt Comm J Qual
   Patient Saf. 2006 Mar;32(3):167–75.
Leape L, Berwick D, Clancy C, et al. Transforming healthcare: a
   safety imperative. Qual Saf Health Care. 2009;18(6):424–8.
Makary MA, Sexton JB, Freischlag JA, et al. Operating room team-
   work among physicians and nurses: teamwork in the eye of the
   beholder. J Am Coll Surg. 2006;202:746–52.
Nundy S, Mukherjee A, Sexton JB, et al. Impact of preoperative
   briefings on operating room delays: a preliminary report. Arch
   Surg. 2008;143(11):1068–72.
Yates GR, Hochman RF, Sayles SM, et al. Sentara Norfolk General
   Hospital: accelerating improvement by focusing on building a
   culture of safety. Jt Comm J Qual Saf. 2004;30(10):534–42.
Chapter 24
Energy Safety
in the Operating Room
Timothy Fokken and Sharon Bachman




Introduction
The use of energy in surgery has become an indispensable
tool over the past century. As new technologies become avail-
able to the surgeon, so should the understanding of the risks
those technologies impose. From inducing unintended defi-
brillation to morbid burns and perforation of a hollow viscus,
the use of energy in surgery carries the burden of life-­
threatening injury despite the obvious benefits. The ethical
onus is on the developer and operator of these devices to
mitigate risk to the patient. Unfortunately, the preponder-
ance of both anecdotal and objective evidence indicates that
there is a perpetual gap between technological advancement
and user understanding of surgical technology. Within this
gap lies unintended injury to the patient. A striking demon-
stration of this educational lacuna was documented in a study
conducted by the Society of American Gastrointestinal and
Endoscopic Surgeon (SAGES). Recognizing a lack of stan-
dardized education regarding surgical energy, a curriculum on

T. Fokken · S. Bachman (*)
Department of Surgery, Inova Fairfax Medical Campus,
Falls Church, VA, USA
e-mail: Sharon.Bachman@inova.org

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature   461
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_24
462   T. Fokken and S. Bachman

the Fundamental Use of Surgical Energy (FUSE) was devel-
oped by subject-matter experts and initially presented as a
postgraduate course. In 2011, the course’s 11-question pretest
was administered to 48 surgeons from SAGES leadership to
assess their baseline knowledge of surgical energy and safety
group; the median score among this experienced cohort was
59% [1]. This data was presented at the national SAGES con-
ference in 2012 and served as a call to arms against the tech-
nology and safety knowledge gap, and is the rationale for the
FUSE curriculum.
   Energy is used by all surgeons, across all disciplines. This
chapter aims to provide the proceduralist with essential prin-
ciples to safe energy use in terms of modalities, unseen energy
dispersal, fire safety, and prevention. Finally, we will outline
the FUSE curriculum that serves as a standard primer for
electrosurgical principles and safety.


Surgical Energy

Cautery
In the early days of surgery (possibly as far back as 3000 B.C
[2].), thermal cautery was the primary form of surgical energy.
Cautery is defined as the passive transfer of heat from the
instrument to the tissue. Before electricity, cauterization was
performed with the use of fire-heated metal placed in direct
contact with a wound or lesion. In the modern surgical lexi-
con, the term “electrocautery” is used often and incorrectly.
Electrocautery uses direct current and generates resistance
that heats the instrument and then the tissue via direct
­application of the device tip. Today, this is mainly limited to
 battery-­powered disposable devices that no longer have a
 role in the operating room (but can be found in most emer-
 gency departments). The term “electrosurgery” is more accu-
 rate to describe the use of hemostatic instruments in today’s
 operating rooms, which are powered by rapid alternating
 current and will be discussed below.
        Chapter 24. Energy Safety in the Operating Room                463

Monopolar

The most common form of electrosurgery used in the modern
operating room (although by definition, all electrosurgery
requires two electrodes) is what surgeons refer to as monopo-
lar radiofrequency energy. The ancestor of modern devices
was developed by scientist Dr. William Bovie, and first used
clinically by Dr. Harvey Cushing in 1926 [3], and its progeny
devices are known by the Bovie eponym in operating rooms
around the world. The true name of the device in total is the
“electrosurgical unit,” or ESU, and entails a generator that
augments a standard 60 Hz electrical alternating current to
500,000 Hz radiofrequency current and directs it to the hand-
held surgical instrument (“Bovie,” the active electrode) via
an insulated cord and allows for energy parameters that can
be altered by the surgeon to achieve the desired effect at the
tissue. This rapid alternating flow of electrons forces the ioni-
cally charged intracellular proteins to equally rapidly realign
their direction as the polarity of the alternating current con-
tinually reverses. The friction created by the movement of
these large molecules then heats the cell (any heat at the tip
of the instrument is secondary heating back from the tissue).
This current then travels through the body through the path
of least resistance to the dispersive electrode (“Bovie pad”)
attached to the patient and returns to the generator. This cre-
ates a closed circuit through the patient, and if the generator
does not detect the same amount of energy returning that it
disperses, the machine will stop generating energy as a safety
precaution.1 In summary, electromagnetic energy applied to
the cells is converted to kinetic energy, which then becomes
thermal energy [4].

1
  The colloquial term “grounding pad” harkens back to the early days of
electrosurgery where a true electrical ground was used to disperse cur-
rent, i.e., there was no closed loop circuit. With this arrangement, any
other metal touching the patient can divert the current away from the
grounding pad and travel through to the metal. This causes a “short” in
the circuit and can lead to local tissue burns or electrocution. Therefore,
true “grounding pads” are no longer used in modern surgery.
464   T. Fokken and S. Bachman

    The surgeon is able to adjust many aspects of the energy
that enters tissue. These include the waveform, amplitude,
duty cycle, and current density. The waveform, amplitude, and
duty cycle are all controlled by the electrosurgical unit and
the handheld device. The pure “Cut” setting creates a con-
stant (continuous current and duty cycle) sinusoidal wave
pattern that is low amplitude (low voltage). This efficient
energy flow leads to rapid intracellular heating, and the cyto-
plasmic water molecules convert to steam to their boiling
point (100 C), vaporizing cells nearly instantaneously. This
rapid phase change minimizes thermal spread to surrounding
tissues. Comparatively, the same energy setting used on the
“Coag” setting creates electron flow that is released in bursts
(short duty cycle), leading to an infrequent, but high-voltage,
active current. The high-voltage pulses of current application
in this mode result in slower increases of intracellular tem-
peratures rising to up to 200 C, which allows for coagulation,
desiccation, and even carbonization of the superficial tissue
surface over a relatively diffuse area [4].
    It is important to mention current density and impedance
when using either of these modes. In essence, the smaller the
surface area in contact between the instrument and the tissue,
the more focused the current transfer and the more localized
the effect. The opposite end of the current density spectrum
is fulguration, whereby holding the instrument just above the
desired tissue necessitates a high-voltage waveform to over-
come the impedance by the surrounding air; the arcing
­electrical current rapidly heats and cools the superficial sur-
 face of the tissue leading to coagulation.
    All of these variables give the surgeon great control of the
 energy applied to the patient. The multitude of combinations
 of voltage, current, density, and technique necessitates a solid
 understanding of the above basic principles in order to
 achieve the desired effect with the least amount of energy
 applied to the patient.
    The safety considerations regarding the use of monopolar
 instrumentation are discussed in the following sections.
       Chapter 24. Energy Safety in the Operating Room     465

Bipolar

While monopolar energy houses one electrode in the hand-
held instrument and the other in the dispersive electrode pad,
bipolar radiofrequency houses both electrodes within the
handheld instrument itself. When tissue is grasped between
the two electrode tips (coaptive coagulation), the current
flows through only that tissue directly and not throughout the
entire body to a distant dispersal pad. This reduces the volt-
age required to have a desired tissue effect and reduces the
risk of current diversion. Early designs of bipolar instruments
were limited by the development of impedance in the tissues
as the coagulum developed. This can lead to incomplete seal-
ing of a vessel and/or increased lateral thermal spread as
energy is diverted away through pathways with less tissue
resistance. Modern bipolar radiofrequency devices utilize
computerized feedback systems that constantly measure tis-
sue impedance and continually adjust the energy delivery for
more efficient localized coagulation. Many of these bipolar
vessel sealers are effective at controlling vessels up to 7 mm
in diameter, and have the addition of a cutting blade that
allows for ligation of the vessel once coagulation is
completed.
   While appropriate use of bipolar instruments can limit
thermal spread and energy diversion, care should be taken to
prevent buildup of coagulum between the two electrode jaws.
As hemostasis relies on protein coagulation, bipolar devices
should be used with caution in any patient with a condition
that leads to protein changes or loss, including liver dysfunc-
tion, collagen vascular disorders, malnutrition, and athero-
sclerotic changes.


Ultrasonic Dissection

Ultrasonic devices convert electromechanical energy to
mechanical energy by generating vibrations at a rapid fre-
quency, which then are converted to thermal energy via fric-
466   T. Fokken and S. Bachman

tion at the instrument’s effector end; thus, no current is
transmitted through the patient. When activated, piezoelec-
trodes in the instrument’s handle generate vibrations at an
ultrasonic frequency ranging from 20 to 100 kHz which drives
an attached solid shaft at the same rate. These vibrations are
transmitted to the active jaw at the tip of the instrument, and
when tissue is clamped between the active and passive jaw,
the friction resulting from the oscillation between the jaws
heats the instrument tip, thus heating the entrapped tissue.
There are different settings for the distance of jaw excursion
which can affect the rate of heating, leading to variable tissue
effects, including vaporization or protein coagulation and tis-
sue separation. Recent models of ultrasonic devices also uti-
lize microprocessors with continuous feedback mechanisms
to control protein denaturation, and some instruments allow
vessels as large as 7 mm can be safely ligated with this method
of electrosurgery.
   Since the radiofrequency energy is limited to the handle of
the device, ultrasonic dissectors do not require a dispersive
electrode, and no stray energy is transmitted to the patient.
They also function in wet environments that might limit the
deployment of electrosurgery. Safety considerations include
keeping the blade clean and keeping coagulum buildup from
forming, and care must be taken to prevent thermal injury to
surrounding structures when the instrument tip is hot.
Although lateral thermal spread at the site of dissection is
limited, inadvertently touching nearby bowel without quench-
ing the hot tip can lead to delayed viscus perforation and
subsequent patient sepsis.


Plasma Energy

Plasma coagulators’ direct current to the desired tissue via a
conductor is formed by a jet of inert gas, usually argon. Argon
is ionized by the current, which creates a zone of low imped-
ance between the electrode on the instrument and the tissue
surface [4]. This allows for the device to avoid physical con-
       Chapter 24. Energy Safety in the Operating Room        467

tact with the tissue but deliver a focused stream of energy to
the tissue surface causing coagulation. Therefore, they are
often used on diffusely bleeding (wet) surfaces that are
unable to be coagulated with a monopolar or bipolar modal-
ity, commonly the liver or spleen.


 afety Consideration in Electrosurgery:
S
Unseen Energy Dispersal
Open Surgery

Safe electrosurgery current dispersal is based on the position-
ing of the receiving dispersive electrode, and placement of
the pad on the patient is not trivial. The large size of the pad
increases the surface area of the electrode, thus decreasing
the current density and preventing tissue injury. It is crucial to
avoid pad placement on bony prominences that lead to pres-
sure points, hair, and scars as these can serve as a path of
reduced resistance and focus enough energy to cause thermal
injury. Most importantly, unseen metal implants can also
serve as conductors of current flow between the two elec-
trodes. Placing a dispersive pad over a metal implant can
focus the current to the point of causing an unseen thermal
injury to the tissue surrounding the implant; no metal pros-
theses should be between the two electrodes. (The use of
bipolar radiofrequency energy mitigates this risk.) Greater
distance between the operative site and the pad allows for
more opportunities for current diversion and injury to other
parts of the body; thus, the pad placement should be as close
as is feasible to the operative site [5].
    Additionally, magnetic fields created by current passing
through the insulated cords (antenna coupling), the device
itself, and the dispersal pad can interfere with pacemaker or
defibrillator function. When a monopolar device is activated,
it can cause an implanted defibrillator to perceive an arrhyth-
mia and deliver a shock. Mitigation strategies for this include
use of bipolar energy, minimizing the power level of the ESU,
468   T. Fokken and S. Bachman

using cut mode, using short bursts of energy on tissue, and
placing the dispersal pad and associated cords away from the
implanted cardiac device (running the cord from the feet) [6,
7]. In a laboratory model, antenna coupling has been demon-
strated to increase the skin temperature at the site of nearby
neuromonitoring and EKG leads when monopolar energy
was used nearby; this was mitigated by decreasing the ESU
wattage used and by separating all cords and cables 15 cm
from each other [8].
    Once starting dissection with an electrosurgery device,
technique becomes paramount to fire safety and burn pre-
vention. Storing the instruments in holsters prevents inadver-
tent activation, residual heating of drapes, or ignition of
alcohol-based preps. Proper retraction places tissue on ten-
sion and decreases the amount of energy required to coagu-
late or cut. Proper exposure prevents inadvertent damage to
surrounding structures, particularly in deep dissections.
    In open surgery, direct contact and direct coupling are the
most likely sources for inadvertent thermal injury to the
patient. Direct contact injury is a result of activation of the
instrument while it is in contact with tissue. Direct coupling is
either the intentional activation of another metal instrument
to transmit current to tissue such as with forceps grasping a
bleeding vessel or the unintentional contact between the acti-
vated instrument and clamps or retractors that can then cause
injury outside the desired field of dissection. These patterns
of injury can be avoided by using the appropriate holsters
and only activating the instrument when it is in full view from
the users hand to the tip and noted to be in contact with only
the intended tissue.
    Residual heat is a third modality of electrosurgical injury
that, while common in open surgery, applies to all forms of
surgery using energy. Simply put, heat acquired by or gener-
ated from the device lingers beyond the point of deactivation,
and when combined with direct contact, unanticipated ther-
mal injury can occur if the device has not sufficiently cooled.
Each type of electrosurgical device has a characteristic period
of time at which it remains a thermal risk. A 2011 study on
       Chapter 24. Energy Safety in the Operating Room       469

the residual heat of laparoscopic instruments demonstrated
that ultrasonic instruments had both the highest peak tem-
perature (173 °C) and longest delay in return to normal tem-
perature (remained 24 °C above baseline temperature at
20 seconds). Monopolar, bipolar, and argon beam modalities
had considerably lower residual heat parameters [9].
   A final note should be made regarding the situational
awareness required when metal becomes part of the surgical
field. Surgical clips and staples are commonly used in all types
of surgery for hemostasis and bowel anastomoses; however,
acknowledgment of the inherent burn injury risk these tools
carry is often underappreciated. For instance, direct contact
between an active instrument and a staple line can heat the
staple to nearly 1000 °C, beyond the melting point of the
staple. Even less contact is required to cause clinically rele-
vant morbidity as a partial thickness burn on small bowel can
occur at temperatures as low as 75 °C and lead to perforation.
Situational awareness is paramount once a staple or clip is
placed.


Laparoscopic and Robotic Surgery
Laparoscopic and robotic surgeries require their own unique
principles in understanding energy transfer in electrosurgery.
Risk of inadvertent injury from direct contact, direct ­coupling,
and residual heat is heightened in the laparoscopic realm
primarily due to the fact that the entire instrument can easily
fall out of the view of the camera. Additional considerations
must be taken into account with minimally invasive surgery
to mitigate electrosurgical risk. Unfortunately, data on lapa-
roscopic sharp, blunt, or thermal injury remain ill-­defined due
to inconsistent reporting. In particular, cases of thermal
injury as the mechanism of action for a missed enterotomy
are difficult to quantify due to delay in diagnosis [10].
   Antenna coupling is an insidious cause of electrosurgical
injury that is now gaining more recognition and most com-
monly applies to minimally invasive approaches. Antenna
470   T. Fokken and S. Bachman

coupling occurs when radiofrequency energy passes through
insulated wire that is in close proximity to and in parallel
configuration with other wires such as long tubular laparo-
scopic instruments, light cords, and camera power cords; these
cords can augment that radiofrequency and generate heat
that can burn the patient or ignite a fire. The higher wattage
used and the closer the proximity of the source cord to these
non-powered instruments, the more energy can transfer via
antenna coupling. This phenomenon is a common cause for
thermal injury in laparoscopy leading to unseen burns to the
patient and even melted plastic across surgical drapes. With
this in mind, it is recommended to keep the electrosurgical
instrument and dispersal pad cords away from other light
cords and wires that will be required for laparoscopic and
robotic surgery.
    Insulation failure is another source of inadvertent thermal
injury. The insulation that surrounds laparoscopic instru-
ments can break down over time with multiple rounds of
sterilization. A study at four urban hospitals found one in five
reusable laparoscopic instruments had an insulation failure,
even at facilities that routinely tested for breaks. Overall they
found that 19% of reusable instruments and 3% of dispos-
able instruments had insulation breaks [11]. When breaks in
the insulation do occur, current can escape and transfer
charge to tissue that is touching or in close proximity to the
break in insulation via arcing. Unfortunately, many defects
cannot be appreciated by direct visualization, and the smaller
the defect, the greater the risk for thermal injury as the
energy dispersion is concentrated into a smaller surface area
(increased current density). In addition to testing instruments
for breaks between cases, active electrode monitoring sys-
tems are available which continuously monitor instruments
for insulation failures during a procedure.
    The final concerning phenomenon in minimally invasive
electrosurgery is capacitive coupling. This occurs when there
is an insulating or resistive material between two conductors
and charge can be stored within the insulator, only to be dis-
charged upon direct contact with another conductor.
       Chapter 24. Energy Safety in the Operating Room       471

Classically, this can be seen between two laparoscopic instru-
ments using monopolar energy that touch along their insula-
tion and then release charge from that insulation to viscera,
usually outside the view of the surgeon. This can be avoided
with proper trocar and instrument placement, along with
careful attention to the length of the laparoscopic instrument
and avoiding contact with viscera.
   Robotic surgery offers new and unique opportunities for
surgical technique. With this advancement, however, come
new risks to the patient in terms of energy safety and fire risk.
Metal trocar cannulas serve as points of direct contact to the
abdominal wall or viscera beyond the point of view of the
operating surgeon and can lead to thermal injury in cases
where the ports are being used for bedside laparoscopy and
monopolar energy is used, or by direct coupling or insulation
failures. A study performed in 2011 demonstrated a preva-
lence of 32% of insulation failures in robotic instruments,
with more occurring in bipolar instruments. The same study
demonstrated the rate of insulation failures increased signifi-
cantly after each of the ten uses, with a rate of up to 80% after
the tenth use [12]. Just as in laparoscopy, cord management is
essential in robotic surgery to avoid antenna coupling. Finally,
the surgeon is far away from the operating field by design,
thus reducing direct observation of the surgical field beyond
the scope of the camera. Recognition of and extinguishing an
operating room fire on or near the patient can be delayed
with the operating surgeon located at the robotic console.


Endoscopy

Energy in endoscopy is not without its own risk and is worth
mentioning. Snares require monopolar energy that is trans-
ferred down the endoscope in parallel with the camera cir-
cuitry. This allows for antenna coupling and heat transfer
from the endoscope to the tissue. Capacitive coupling may
occur when using monopolar energy, and this energy can be
discharged to the opposing bowel wall outside the operator’s
472   T. Fokken and S. Bachman

view. Methods to reduce this risk include using short duration
bursts of energy, using low-energy modes and reducing the
power setting, and using an ESU that continuously monitors
impedance and fully insufflating the bowel to provide the
most distance between the endoscope and the bowel wall
[13].


Operating Room Fires and Fire Prevention
Operating room fires are a rare event, reported up to 550–600
times per year in the United States alone and near-misses are
likely underreported [14]. While rare, they carry a significant
morbidity and mortality when they do occur and are likely to
result in malpractice lawsuits [14]. This makes intraoperative
fires an often-devastating outcome for both the patient and
the surgeon, and leaves long-lasting physical and psychologi-
cal sequelae. While the rarity of these events is reassuring, it
can lead to complacency. Prevention begins with constant
vigilance and situational awareness in spite of a perceived
lack of danger.
   Fires require three important factors in order to occur: (1)
heat source or ignition, (2) fuel (3), and oxygen. In most
instances, the ignition source is the handheld monopolar
device. In fact, one case series implicated monopolar energy
in 90% of operating room fires [15]. However, residual heat
from a laparoscopic lens, drills, and ultrasound devices can
also serve as a source. Fuel is ubiquitous in the operating
field. Alcohol base preps, drapes, sponges, gowns, hair, and
skin all serve as potential fuel sources once ignition begins.
The normal oxygen saturation in the air is 21%; however,
near the airway or in cases where nasal cannulas or face-
masks are used, it can be substantially higher. An increase in
ambient air oxygen saturation to >30% can cause nearly all
objects to become fuel for fire [16], and time to ignition simi-
larly decreases with increased oxygen concentration [17]. In a
review of OR fire claims, 83% of electrosurgery-induced fires
         Chapter 24. Energy Safety in the Operating Room   473

occurred during MAC or regional anesthesia; thus, these con-
ditions require heightened attention to risks [15].
   Due to the rarity of such catastrophic events, there is lim-
ited training at the surgeon level for what steps should be
taken in the event of an operating room fire. The Emergency
Care Research Institute (ECRI) provides the following rec-
ommendations for an operating room fire on the surgical
patient [18]:
1. Stop the flow of all airway gases to the patient.
2. Immediately remove all burning materials and have
   another team member extinguish them.
   (a) If needed, use a CO2 fire extinguisher to put out a fire
       on the patient.
3. Care for the patient:
     (i) Resume ventilation.
    (ii) Control bleeding.
   (iii) Evacuate the patient if there is still danger from
         smoke or fire.
   (iv) Examine the patient for injuries and treat
         accordingly.
4. If the fire is not quickly controlled:
    (i) Evacuate and isolate the room.
   (ii) Notify other operating room staff and the fire
        department.
   The ECRI also has recommendations for extinguishing
airway fires:
1.   Remove the endotracheal tube.
2.   Stop the flow of all gases to the airway.
3.   Pour saline into the airway.
4.   Care for the patient:
       (i) Re-establish the airway.
      (ii) Resume ventilation, and only switch to 100% FiO2
           when you are certain the fire has been extinguished.
     (iii) Examine airway and assess degree of injury and treat
           patient accordingly.
474   T. Fokken and S. Bachman

    Fire mitigation risk begins before the patient is in the oper-
ating room. Fire extinguishers must be available in every
room, and their location confirmed before every case. Sterile
saline should be on the field at all times when an energy
device is used. Special considerations should be made for
surgery of the head and neck, trachea, bronchial tree, and
upper chest. In these cases, closed oxygen delivery with an
endotracheal tube or laryngeal mask airway is preferred.
Additionally, deliver the minimum amount of required oxy-
gen necessary, ideally less than 30% FiO2 or 5–10 L/min in
open systems. In these high-risk scenarios, it is recommended
to soak gauze and coat facial hair with saline and surgical
jelly, respectively, and to arrange drapes to avoid accumula-
tion of oxygen near the surgical field.


FUSE Curriculum
The Fundamental Use of Surgical Energy (FUSE) curricu-
lum was developed by SAGES to address the deficiencies in
surgeon and trainee knowledge that pose risk to the patient.
It is the first comprehensive educational tool designed to
close the knowledge gap between surgical technology
advancement and provider practice. The course covers 11
domains (Fig. 24.1) ranging from physical principles of the
energy devices to their clinical applications and safe opera-
tion. The didactic content is free, and is available at www.


Figure 24.1          Fundamentals of Electrosurgery
The FUSE             Mechanisms and Prevention of Adverse Events
Program curric-      Monopolar Devices
                     Bipolar Devices
ulum                 Radiofrequency for Soft Tissue Ablation
                     Endoscopic Devices
                     Ultrasonic Energy Devices
                     Microwave Energy Systems
                     Energy Devices in Pediatric Surgery
                     Integration of Energy Systems with Other Devices
                     Prevention of OR Fires
       Chapter 24. Energy Safety in the Operating Room        475

fusedidactic.org. A high-stakes exam that certifies knowledge
acquisition is available, as is CME credit. While there is no
formal simulation-based assessment as with the laparoscopic
and endoscopic fundamentals courses (FLS, FES), a hands-
­on, bench-top simulation developed by the FUSE authors
 demonstrated increased learning and retention of the FUSE
 curriculum up to 1 year after the teaching session [19, 20].
    FUSE attempts to change the surgical energy teaching
modality from an apprenticeship model that is not standard-
ized to a formal curated curriculum that can be adapted as
technology advances. From a purely ethical standpoint, it
stands to reason that surgeons undergo formal education and
assessment in the field of surgical energy and safety. The
FUSE curriculum should become part and parcel of a com-
plete surgical education to ensure the most up-to-date tech-
nology can be used with the least risk for the benefit of the
patient.


References
1. Feldman LS, Fuchshuber P, Jones DB, Mischna J, Schwaitzberg
   SD, FUSE (Fundamental Use of Surgical Energy™) Task Force.
   Surgeons don't know what they don’t know about the safe use of
   energy in surgery. Surg Endosc. 2012;26(10):2735–9.
2. Majno G. The healing hand; man and wound in the ancient
   world. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Press; 1991.
3. Cushing H, Bovie W. Electrosurgery as an aid to the removal of
   intracranial tumors. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 1928;47:751–84.
4. Munro MG. Fundamentals of electrosurgery part I: principles of
   radiofrequency energy for surgery. In: Feldman L, Fuchshuber P,
   Jones D, editors. The SAGES manual on the fundamental use of
   surgical energy (FUSE). New York: Springer; 2012.
5. Brunt LM. Fundamentals of electrosurgery part II: thermal
   injury mechanisms and prevention. In: Feldman L, Fuchshuber
   P, Jones D, editors. The SAGES manual on the fundamental use
   of surgical energy (FUSE). New York: Springer; 2012.
6. Govekar HR, Robinson TN, Varosy PD, Girard G, Montero
   PN, Dunn CL, Jones EL, Stiegmann GV. Effect of monopolar
   radiofrequency energy on pacemaker function. Surg Endosc.
   2012;26(10):2784–8.
476   T. Fokken and S. Bachman

 7. Robinson TN, Varosy PD, Guillaume G, Dunning JE, Townsend
    NT, Jones EL, Paniccia A, Stiegmann GV, Weyer C, Rozner
    MA. Effect of radiofrequency energy emitted from monopolar
    “Bovie” instruments on cardiac implantable electronic devices. J
    Am Coll Surg. 2014;219(3):399–406.
 8. Townsend NT, Jones EL, Paniccia A, Vandervelde J, McHenry
    JR, Robinsons TN. Antenna coupling explains unintended
    thermal injury caused by common operating room monitoring
    devices. Surg Laparosc Endosc Percutan Tech. 2015;25:111–3.
 9. Govekar HR, Robinson TN, Steigmann GV, McGreevy
    FT. Residual heat of laparoscopic energy devices: how long
    must the surgeon wait to touch additional tissue? Surg Endosc.
    2011;25:3499–502.
10. Cassaro S. Delayed manifestations of laparoscopic bowel injury.
    Am Surg. 2015;81(5):478–82.
11. Montero PN, Robinson TN, Weaver JS, Stiegmann
    GV. Insulation failure in laparoscopic instruments. Surg Endosc.
    2010;24(2):462–5.
12. Espada M, Munoz R, Noble BN, Magrina JF. Insulation failure in
    robotic and laparoscopic instrumentation: a prospective evalua-
    tion. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2011;205(2):121.e1–5.
13. Jones EJ, Madani A, Overby DM, Kiourti A, Bojja-­
    Venkatakrishnan S, Mikami DJ, Hazey JW, Arcomano TR,
    Robinson TN. Stray energy transfer during endoscopy. Surg
    Endosc. 2017;31(10):3946–51.
14. Choudhry AJ, Haddad NN, Khasawneh MA, Cullinane DC,
    Zielinski MD. Surgical fires and operative burns: lessons
    learned from a 33-year review of medical litigation. Am J Surg.
    2017;213(3):558–64.
15. Mehta SP, Bhananker SM, Posner KL, Domino KB. Operating
    room fires: a closed claims analysis. Anesthesiology.
    2013;118(5):1133–9.
16. Culp WC Jr, Kimbrough BA, Luna S. Flammability of surgi-
    cal drapes and materials in varying concentrations of oxygen.
    Anesthesiology. 2013;119(4):770–6.
17. Goldberg J. Brief laboratory report: surgical drape flammability.
    AANA J. 2006;74(5):352–4.
18. https://d84vr99712pyz.cloudfront.net/p/pdf/solutions/afig/
    emergency-­procedure-­extinguishing-­a-­surgical-­fire.pdf.
       Chapter 24. Energy Safety in the Operating Room           477

19. Madani A, Watanabe Y, Townsend N, Pucher PH, Robinson TN,
    Egerszegi PE, Olasky J, Bachman SL, Park CW, Amin N, Tang DT,
    Haase E, Bardana D, Jones DB, Vassiliou M, Fried GM, Feldman
    LS. Structured simulation improves learning of the Fundamental
    Use of Surgical Energy™ curriculum: a multicenter randomized
    controlled trial. Surg Endosc. 2016 Feb;30(2):684–91.
20. Madani A, Watanabe Y, Vassiliou MC, Fuchshuber P, Jones DB,
    Schwaitzberg SD, Fried GM, Feldman LS. Long-term knowledge
    retention following simulation-based training for electrosurgical
    safety: 1-year follow-up of a randomized controlled trial. Surg
    Endosc. 2016;30(3):1156–63.
Chapter 25
Patient Safety Indicators
as Benchmarks
Stacy M. Ranson and Jonathan M. Dort




Quality Measures and Patient Safety
Patient safety and quality has increasingly garnered more
attention over the last 20 years as healthcare delivery has
focused on a more systematic way to ensure the implementa-
tion and execution of best practice guidelines. The Agency for
Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) is an integral part
of measuring patient safety and outcomes. A greater empha-
sis on safety has been at the forefront of healthcare delivery
since the Institute of Medicine released its landmark report
“To Err Is Human: Building a Safer Health System” in 2000.
In this important statement, the committee emphasizes the
extent of medical errors, specifically preventable ones, with a
goal to shift the focus “from blaming individuals for past
errors to a focus on preventing future errors by designing
safety into the system.” [1] The shift in focus to improve sys-


S. M. Ranson
Inova Fairfax Medical Campus, Falls Church, VA, USA
J. M. Dort (*)
Department of Surgery, Inova Fairfax Medical Campus,
Falls Church, VA, USA
e-mail: Jonathan.dort@inova.org

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature   479
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_25
480    S. M. Ranson and J. M. Dort

tems models those already in place in other complicated
markets such as the aviation industry. This treatise is centered
on the belief that effective and quality healthcare delivery
should be predicated on building safer systems built to avoid
accidental injury from pitfalls in poor equipment design,
communication issues, and other barriers to patient care.
    Specifically, in the surgical community, adverse events can
be devastating to a patient’s postoperative recovery and, in
some cases, life-threatening or lethal. In a comprehensive
review by Ferraris et al., a review of over 1.9 million surgical
patients found that 207,236 patients developed serious postop-
erative complications, and of these, death occurred in 21,731
(10.5%) and that these represented cases of failure to rescue.
Further review showed that in these groups of patients, when
stratified according to preoperative risk profiles, 90% of opera-
tive deaths occurred in the highest-risk quintile. Often, these
patients suffered from several postoperative sequelae; only
31.8% had a single postoperative complication [2]. These find-
ings underscore the massive impact postoperative adverse
outcomes have on surgical patients. Additionally, in an obser-
vational study by Healy et al. from a single institution, a signifi-
cant effect of adverse events was found to affect hospital costs
and the financial burden on hospitals and payers. The overall
complication rate for this cohort was 14.5% (744 of 5120) for
all procedures, and for studied procedures, mean hospital costs
were $19,626 (119%) higher for patients with complications
compared with those without complications. Procedures
included cholecystectomies, colectomies, proctectomies, small
bowel procedures, and ventral hernia repairs. The data showed
an overall profit margin that decreased from 5.8% for patients
without complications to 0.1% for surgical patients with com-
plications, further underscoring the monetary implications of
adverse outcomes on the healthcare system at large [3].
    In the last few decades, with an increased spotlight on
patient safety, the culture of quality measurement has been
further emphasized. Data have shown that this indeed has an
impact on patient outcomes. A review from Mardon et al.
showed a relationship between patient safety culture and
outcomes. Findings from this study show that a more positive
     Chapter 25.   Patient Safety Indicators as Benchmarks   481

patient safety culture is associated with fewer adverse events.
The data from 179 hospitals were reviewed including Hospital
Survey on Patient Safety Culture (HSOPS) and Patient
Safety Indicators (PSI). Hospitals with higher patient safety
scores as indicated by the HSOPS tended to have fewer docu-
mented adverse events, such that for a hospital scoring 1 SD
above the mean on the HSOPS, on average, would experience
0.64 fewer cases per 1000 patients for the PSI average than a
hospital at the HSOPS mean [4]. Indeed, another study from
the intensive care unit (ICU) setting regarding safety culture
found that there was an important relationship between ICU
personnel perception and patient outcomes. When looking at
the ICU safety climate percent-positive score, for every 10%
decrease in safety perception, there was a significantly
increased length of stay (LOS) by 15%. Also, lower percep-
tions of management were significantly associated with
higher hospital mortality [5]. A cross-sectional study of 91
hospitals collected data from a survey of hospital personnel
and found hospitals with a better safety climate had lower
incidence of PSIs, thereby further connecting climate to indi-
cators of safety [6]. These data demonstrate that not only is
quality measurement important, but that provider perception
regarding safety has an objective impact on patient outcomes.
Building a culture that encourages recognition of errors and
learning from adverse events and outcomes at an organiza-
tional level to further improve safety in healthcare delivery is
of paramount importance.


 atient Safety Indicators as a Measure
P
of Quality
In the ever-present drive to enhance patient safety and
improve systems, an objective measure of quality was formu-
lated in order to track hospital outcomes in healthcare deliv-
ery. Patient Safety Indicators (PSIs) were formulated by the
AHRQ in order to outline how well hospitals are performing
when it comes to key measures and potentially preventable
adverse events. There are four different forms of Quality
482   S. M. Ranson and J. M. Dort

Indicator modules with which the AHRQ uses in order to
measure efficacy of care delivery, including Patient Safety
Indicators, Prevention Quality Indicators, Inpatient Quality
Indicators, and Pediatric Quality Indicators. There are a total
of 27 Patient Safety Indicators that evaluate complications
and adverse events that are potentially preventable, often by
evaluating potential barriers on a system level that impede
exceptional care. Often, PSIs are used to track hospital and
even provider outcomes, as well as drive payment and pay for
performance models involving reimbursement.
   Patient Safety Indicators are divided into two categories –
provider-level and area-level PSIs. Provider-level PSIs include
issues related to technical errors, difficulty with procedures,
and obstetric or birth trauma. Other factors tracked include
postoperative complications, including bleeding/hemorrhage,
pulmonary embolism or deep vein thrombosis, sepsis, respira-
tory failure, hip fracture (from inhospital falls), accidental
puncture or laceration, and issues relating to the birthing
process. These are monitored by using secondary International
Classification of Diseases, Ninth and Tenth Revision (ICD-9
and ICD-10) diagnosis codes. Some PSIs include complica-
tions that may occur after a patient’s index admission during
a different hospitalization. Such adverse outcomes include a
foreign body left during a procedure, postoperative wound
dehiscence in abdominopelvic surgical patients, accidental
puncture or laceration, and postoperative hemorrhage or
hematoma. These are deemed area-level PSIs and pertain to
issues relating to safety within a hospital system. Importantly,
area-level PSI tracking is needed to identify deficiencies
within a system. This is necessary to ensure an environment
of safety, and a review of processes, including best practices
and standards of care, as well as departmental and multidisci-
plinary evaluations to ensure appropriate and streamlined
delivery of that care.
   Monitoring provider- and area-level PSIs may uncover
deficiencies within the information technology realm and
potential electronic medical record pitfalls leading to errors
or adverse events. Many PSIs are related specifically to surgi-
     Chapter 25.   Patient Safety Indicators as Benchmarks   483

cal outcomes because the associated ICD-9 and ICD-10
codes related to postoperative complications are readily cap-
tured and obtained. In contrast, quality measures related to
chronic medical or psychiatric conditions are often comor-
bidities present on admission that are difficult to isolate and
identify [7].
   Area-level PSIs can be monitored by both ICD-9 and
ICD-10 principal diagnosis codes and secondary diagnoses
regarding the subsequent associated complication. Because
PSIs are tracked primarily via clinician documentation and
linked ICD-9 and ICD-10 codes, there is a dependency on the
accuracy of that documentation and coding to capture correct
PSIs. This is a major criticism of using PSIs as the way to mea-
sure quality and outcomes which has been studied at length.
Many PSIs are often not captured due to incomplete docu-
mentation, and others may be incorrectly flagged as adverse
events that were due to disease processes.


 fficacy of Using Patient Safety Indicators
E
to Measure Quality and Surgical Outcomes
Patient Safety Indicators are an invaluable tool used to track
quality outcomes and hospital and provider performance.
Because they are captured via ICD-9 and ICD-10 codes that
are entered by providers, PSIs are relatively easy to obtain;
however, the accuracy of PSIs is then founded on accurate
documentation which can be variable and unreliable. In a
single institution study by Kubasiak et al., 136 surgical cases
for 1 year were queried to evaluate target PSIs and whether
a PSI event was inherent to the disease process and not a
direct effect of the surgery, thereby not a marker of patient
safety (false positive). The PSIs reviewed included iatrogenic
pneumothorax (PSI-6), puncture or laceration (PSI-9), and
postoperative hemorrhage (PSI-15). The cases were reviewed
by senior patient safety officers, one with surgical training
and one with medical training. The study found that in 11.8–
33.3% of cases, the reviewers found the PSI was related to the
484   S. M. Ranson and J. M. Dort

disease process, not the procedure, and therefore a false posi-
tive. Further, the reviewers agreed that these events were not
clinically significant in 11.8–30.4% of cases. There was moder-
ate interrater reliability for the PSIs and clearly a high false-­
positive rate [8].
    In addition to Patient Safety Indicators, other means of
evaluating surgical outcomes have been utilized. The
American College of Surgeons National Surgical Quality
Improvement Program (ACS-NSQIP) is used to compare
surgical data for general and vascular operations based on
observed versus expected outcomes that was initially imple-
mented in 1991 in the US Department of Veterans Affairs in
order to improve quality surgical care and build consistent
systems of care [9]. Unlike PSIs which use ICD-9 and ICD-10
codes inputted into the chart from providers, the data
obtained for ACS-NSQIP outcomes is collected by trained
abstractors using defined criteria for complications. A single
institution study compared ACS-NSQIP and AHRQ-PSI
methods for general and vascular surgical inpatients and
found that ACS-NSQIP adverse events were identified in 564
(7.4%) patients and AHRQ-PSIs were identified in 268
(3.5%) patients. Of these cases, only 159 (2.1%) patients had
inpatient postoperative events that were captured by both
methods, and less than a third of the ACS-NSQIP clinically
important events were identified by the AHRQ-PSI ICD-9
method, thus calling into question the sensitivity of PSIs as a
reliable measure of capturing adverse events [10].
    A large database review correlated PSIs to determine if
there was a significant impact on length of stay, charges, and
mortality according to 18 different PSIs. It was found that
length of stay ranged from 0 to 10.89 days for injury to a neo-
nate and postoperative sepsis, respectively. The cost associ-
ated with PSI ranged from $0 for obstetric trauma to $57,727
for postoperative sepsis. In terms of mortality, the range was
from 0% for obstetric trauma to 21.96% for postoperative
sepsis [11]. This analysis showed that Patient Safety Indicators
are a valuable measure of patient outcomes; however, these
outcomes vary widely in severity and clinical significance.
     Chapter 25.   Patient Safety Indicators as Benchmarks   485

Limitations to Patient Safety Indicators
Many have argued that using PSIs to gauge quality and out-
comes in the surgical realm may not be an accurate form of
measurement. For instance, when evaluating PSI-9 (acciden-
tal puncture or laceration during a surgical procedure), a
single-hospital institutional review for colorectal procedures
found that 9.2% of cases included this indicator. However,
there was a wide variability in the significance and outcome
of that accidental laceration, such that this PSI includes sero-
sal tear (47%), enterotomy (38%), and extraintestinal injury
(15%). Notably, those with serosal tears (the majority of cases
including this PSI) had no significant difference in their surgi-
cal outcome when compared to those without injury. Those
cases that involved an enterotomy, however, did have longer
operative times, some requiring resection or diversion, and
increased lengths of stay. Similarly, those with extraintestinal
injury had higher rates of reoperation and sepsis [12]. This
study underscores the notion that not all Patient Safety
Indicators are created equal and that there is a wide variabil-
ity on the clinical impact of each PSI. Further, PSI definitions
used are not necessarily specific enough in verbiage and thus
can introduce human error into the equation as coders have
to decide what qualifies for each PSI.
   Another PSI (PSI 9), postoperative hemorrhage or hema-
toma (PHH), was evaluated to determine if this PSI qualifier
is an accurate representation of outcomes by determining
positive predictive value (PPV) and characterizing cases as
true or false positives. True positives were identified in 84
cases, with a PPV of 75%, with a majority having a diagnosis
of hematoma (63%) and hemorrhage (30%), and some with
both diagnoses (7%). False positives included events that
were present on admission, hemorrhage identified during the
index operation and controlled, or postoperative hemor-
rhage/hematoma not requiring a further intervention/proce-
dure [13]. Once more this demonstrates that there are indeed
many limitations to using PSIs as an accurate measure of
surgical outcomes.
486   S. M. Ranson and J. M. Dort

   A 2016 systematic review and meta-analysis of published
studies from 1990 to 2015 sought to evaluate the validity of
hospital-acquired condition (HAC) measures and PSIs. Only
five measures, iatrogenic pneumothorax (PSI 6/HAC 17),
central line-associated bloodstream infections (CLABSI)
(PSI 7), postoperative hemorrhage/hematoma (PSI 9), post-
operative deep vein thrombosis/pulmonary embolus (PSI 12),
and accidental puncture/laceration (PSI 15), had sufficient
data for pooled meta-analysis. Only accidental puncture/lac-
eration (PSI 15) met the study criteria for validity, which was
a positive predictive value (PPV) of >80%, but even this
result was described as weakened by study heterogeneity.
Utilizing the 80% threshold for PPV and sensitivity, the study
found that there is limited validity for the HAC and PSI mea-
sures, and recommended that their use for public reporting
and pay-for-performance should be re-evaluated [14].
   The PSI data for many studies was previously based on the
ICD-9 framework; however, with the introduction of the
ICD-10 system, there is a new inclusion of chronicity and tim-
ing of diagnoses. When only relying on ICD-9 codes, there is
an inability to differentiate a preexisting diagnosis from one
arising during the course of the hospitalization. One review
by McIsaac et al. found that the institution of timing with
ICD-10 codes did not increase accuracy to correctly capture
PSIs, but that future work is still needed to integrate and
improve PSI indicator systems [15].


Conclusion
With an increasing emphasis on patient safety and quality, a
meaningful and accurate way to measure healthcare delivery
and outcomes has become a necessary component of improv-
ing systems at a national, hospital, and provider levels. Using
the AHRQ’s Patient Safety Indicators as a means of measur-
ing efficacy of quality outcomes has many benefits. The PSI
model relies on ICD-9 and ICD-10 codes in order to capture
adverse events for hospitalized patients. Patient Safety
     Chapter 25.   Patient Safety Indicators as Benchmarks    487

Indicators do, however, have limitations. Since PSI data is
captured via clinical documentation, it relies heavily on the
accuracy of inputting those diagnoses appropriately, and ret-
rospective review has shown that many adverse events may
go uncaptured. Additionally, many PSIs have a wide variabil-
ity in their clinical impact for which some have a negligible
role while others have a large part to play in a patient’s over-
all recovery. For instance, as shown above, the PSI accidental
laceration or puncture includes negligible surgical events
such as repaired serosal tears, but also includes enterotomies
which may have required a formal resection. In this case,
these two events are classified the same, but have a vast dif-
ference in their clinical significance.
    Overall, Patient Safety Indicators are a useful means to
track hospital and provider performance when it comes to
quality healthcare delivery. PSIs are useful for predicting
relationships between mortality, length of stay, and cost.
While PSIs are measured nationally and are an important
component of hospital system reporting for payment and
quality, they are also important within a hospital to identify
and target potential areas for improvement. With an ongoing
emphasis on quality and improved patient outcomes, particu-
larly in the surgical realm, using PSIs will continue to be an
integral part of striving toward streamlining systems and
working to pinpoint preventable adverse events to further
improve healthcare delivery.


References
 1. To err is human: building a safer health system. National
    Academies Press; 2000:9728. https://doi.org/10.17226/9728.
 2. Ferraris VA, Bolanos M, Martin JT, Mahan A, Saha
    SP. Identification of patients with postoperative compli-
    cations who are at risk for failure to rescue. JAMA Surg.
    2014;149(11):1103. https://doi.org/10.1001/jamasurg.2014.1338.
 3. Healy MA, Mullard AJ, Campbell DA, Dimick JB. Hospital and
    payer costs associated with surgical complications. JAMA Surg.
    2016;151(9):823. https://doi.org/10.1001/jamasurg.2016.0773.
488    S. M. Ranson and J. M. Dort

 4. Mardon RE, Khanna K, Sorra J, Dyer N, Famolaro T. Exploring
    relationships between hospital patient safety culture and adverse
    events. J Patient Saf. 2010;6(4):226–32. https://doi.org/10.1097/
    PTS.0b013e3181fd1a00.
 5. Huang DT, Clermont G, Kong L, et al. Intensive care unit safety
    culture and outcomes: a US multicenter study. Int J Qual Health
    Care. 2010;22(3):151–61. https://doi.org/10.1093/intqhc/mzq017.
 6. Singer S, Lin S, Falwell A, Gaba D, Baker L. Relationship
    of safety climate and safety performance in hospi-
    tals. Health Serv Res. 2009;44(2p1):399–421. https://doi.
    org/10.1111/j.1475-­6773.2008.00918.x.
 7. Barton A. Patient safety and quality: an evidence-based
    handbook for nurses. AORN J. 2009;90(4):601–2. https://doi.
    org/10.1016/j.aorn.2009.09.014.
 8. Kubasiak JC, Francescatti AB, Behal R, Myers JA. Patient safety
    indicators for judging hospital performance: still not ready for
    prime time. Am J Med Qual. 2017;32(2):129–33. https://doi.
    org/10.1177/1062860615618782.
 9. Henderson WG, Daley J. Design and statistical methodol-
    ogy of the National Surgical Quality Improvement Program:
    why is it what it is? Am J Surg. 2009;198(5):S19–27. https://doi.
    org/10.1016/j.amjsurg.2009.07.025.
10. Cima RR, Lackore KA, Nehring SA, et al. How best to measure
    surgical quality? Comparison of the Agency for Healthcare
    Research and Quality Patient Safety Indicators (AHRQ-PSI)
    and the American College of Surgeons National Surgical Quality
    Improvement Program (ACS-NSQIP) postoperative adverse
    events at a single institution. Surgery. 2011;150(5):943–9. https://
    doi.org/10.1016/j.surg.2011.06.020.
11. Zhan C. Excess length of stay, charges, and mortality attrib-
    utable to medical injuries during hospitalization. JAMA.
    2003;290(14):1868. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.290.14.1868.
12. Kin C, Snyer K, Kiran R, Remzi F, Vogel J. Accidental puncture
    or laceration in colorectal surgery: a quality indicator or a com-
    plexity measure? Dis Colon Rectum. 2013;56(2):219–25.
13. Borzecki AM, Kaafarani H, Cevasco M, et al. How valid is the
    AHRQ patient safety indicator “postoperative hemorrhage or
    hematoma”? J Am Coll Surg. 2011;212(6):946–953.e2. https://
    doi.org/10.1016/j.jamcollsurg.2010.09.033.
     Chapter 25.    Patient Safety Indicators as Benchmarks       489

14. Winters BD, Bharmal A, Wilson RF, et al. Validity of the agency
    for health care research and quality patient safety indicators and
    the centers for medicare and medicaid hospital-acquired condi-
    tions. Med Care. 2016;54(12):1105–11. https://doi.org/10.1097/
    MLR.0000000000000550.
15. McIsaac DI, Hamilton GM, Abdulla K, et al. Validation of new
    ICD-10-based patient safety indicators for identification of
    in-hospital complications in surgical patients: a study of diag-
    nostic accuracy. BMJ Qual Saf. 2020;29(3):209–16. https://doi.
    org/10.1136/bmjqs-­2018-­0 08852.
Chapter 26
Culture of Safety and Era
of Better Practices
Eileen R. Smith and Shaina R. Eckhouse




Introduction
While we traditionally consider surgeon skill and experience
to be the major driving factor in surgical outcomes, a growing
body of evidence demonstrates that the perioperative envi-
ronment impacts patient safety and outcomes [1]. An organi-
zational culture of safety is a key tool in the pursuit of
excellence in patient safety and surgical outcomes [1, 2]. The
Joint Commission defines safety culture as the sum of what
an organization is and does in the pursuit of safety. A safety
culture is the product of individual and group beliefs, values,
attitudes, perceptions, competencies, and patterns of behavior
that determine the organization’s commitment to quality and
patient safety [3]. In a culture of safety, the attitudes, values,
and policies of an organization promote and elevate safety at
all levels [1, 4]. Organizations must implement robust proce-
dures and policies that support and sustain a just culture,
which shifts error analysis and prevention toward a fair-­


E. R. Smith (*) · S. R. Eckhouse
Section of Minimally Invasive Surgery, Department of Surgery,
Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO, USA
e-mail: e.r.smith@wustl.edu

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature   491
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_26
492   E. R. Smith and S. R. Eckhouse

minded, systems-based approach that supports open report-
ing and accountability while avoiding individual blame [5].


Barriers to Achieving a Culture of Safety
It is clear that a culture of safety should be our goal as sur-
geons. However, the barriers to achieving this in reality are
challenging in their scope and diversity. We identify four criti-
cal barriers to attaining a culture of safety: traditional hierar-
chical culture, communication disconnects, team dynamics,
and increasing complexity of surgical services. Each of these
concerns deserves special attention as we work to recognize
and ultimately break down barriers to a culture of safety in
surgical practice.


Hierarchy in Surgical Culture
The culture of general surgery has long been infused with a
strong, hierarchical system representing a persistent obstacle
to adopting a true culture of safety. Attending surgeons have
traditionally been considered the leader in the operating
room - the captain of the ship. In one study comparing medi-
cine and the aviation industry, only 55% of surgeons were
opposed to steep hierarchies, in which senior members are
not open to input from junior members [6]. In fact, surgical
training programs rely on this structure, and surgical residents
perceive significant professional consequences to disrupting
this hierarchy [7]. This culture, despite diminishing over time
as workplace values have shifted, remains a key barrier to the
open communication and accountability we seek in
establishing a culture of safety. If trainees and our non-­
­
surgeon team members in the operating room feel intimi-
dated by this hierarchical framework, they will be less likely
to speak up about patient safety concerns [8–11].
Chapter 26.   Culture of Safety and Era of Better Practices   493

Communication Disconnects
A storied history exists in the specialty of surgery in regard to
poor communication and disruptive behavior. These commu-
nication and behavioral issues negatively impact patient out-
comes [12–14]. Tense communications directly diminish
teamwork quality [15]. Aside from specifically disruptive
behavior, patient safety can be impacted by simple communi-
cation failures that result in the loss of information between
team members [16]. One observational study of operating
rooms documented a 30% rate of communication failure,
with up to 36% of these failures having a measurable impact
on patient safety [17]. Communications across disciplines –
for instance, surgeon to nurse – remain particularly vulnera-
ble to errors [18]. It should be noted that lead surgeons are
frequently unaware of how effectively they communicate and
the level of psychological safety their team members feel,
with a significant difference in perception of safety culture
when compared to other operating room staff such as nurses,
scrub technicians, and anesthesiologists [19].


Team Dynamics
Today’s operating room relies on a surgical team working
effectively and efficiently in concert to deliver excellent
patient care. Due to scheduling needs, operative teams may
change in composition multiple times throughout the course
of a single operation. This results in a lack of familiarity
among team members and even a lack of familiarity with the
operation to be performed. One example from cardiac sur-
gery demonstrated that teams with less familiarity caused an
increase in number of teamwork and communication related
errors [20].
   Team dynamics are additionally complicated by the effect
of implicit biases and microagressions in the workplace.
494   E. R. Smith and S. R. Eckhouse

Despite the well-acknowledged advantages to a diverse
workforce, diversity within medicine is still lacking in part
due to implicit biases and microaggressions [21, 22].
Interestingly, women and minorities experience a significant
amount of stress and anxiety as a result of microaggressions.
These subtle discriminatory events contribute to an environ-
ment where these team members feel undervalued and dele-
gitimized [23]. Recent evaluation of current surgical residents
demonstrated a correlation between these experiences and
risk of burnout [24]. These factors erode our ability to func-
tion as an effective team by pushing us away from a culture
of safety and make it difficult to nimbly respond to patient
safety concerns.


Increasing Complexity of Surgical Services
Delivery of surgical care, especially in the area of minimally
invasive surgery, is now more complex than ever. Even rou-
tine operations can include a wide range of techniques and
technologies, from surgical robots to advanced laparoscopic
devices, instruments, and camera technologies. The introduc-
tion of these advanced technologies has increased the oppor-
tunity for error just due to the increasing number of complex
devices involved [25, 26]. We must acknowledge that the
complexity of surgery in the current era can lead to patient
safety events.
   The surgeon of today must also effectively manage their
time to maintain the electronic medical record, respond to
patient questions and concerns quickly, and negotiate with
insurance groups. These varied demands contribute to an
increased workload and pull the attention of the surgeon in
many directions – potentially increasing the opportunity for
errors and safety events if the appropriate infrastructure is
not in place. We know that distraction can be a source of
Chapter 26.   Culture of Safety and Era of Better Practices   495

error, and in this period, the practicing surgeon has numerous
demands on their time beyond traditional clinical care. Prior
work has shown intraoperative phone calls can impact techni-
cal performance, and one observational study illustrated most
distractions related to phone usage in the operating rooms
are due to surgeons responding to calls [27, 28]. The introduc-
tion of the electronic medical record, while not without
advantages, adds to the increased work burden for practicing
surgeons. (This is discussed in more detail in Chap. 38.) More
specifically, a recent investigation of surgeon workflow dem-
onstrated that 30% of working time, representing a median of
23 hours per week, is spent managing the electronic medical
record [29].


 trategies to Overcome Barriers and Establish
S
a Culture of Safety
Despite these numerous challenges, it is possible to move the
field of surgery toward a robust culture of safety. This chapter
describes four key strategies to potentially address these bar-
riers: event reporting, standardized communication, a focus
on teamwork, and surgical leadership. Healthcare systems
and surgical practices should adopt easy to access systems for
reporting errors that take team member concerns seriously,
regardless of their role. Surgeons and their teams should
establish clear communication standards that work to flatten
the hierarchy and make routine the solicitation of input from
all team members. These standards should be utilized in con-
cert with specific training with a focus on effective teamwork
that includes mitigating bias and microagressions in the
workplace. Finally, surgeons must fully recognize their role as
key leaders in the operating room with the important goal of
promoting safety.
496   E. R. Smith and S. R. Eckhouse

 vent Reporting and Promotion of a Just
E
Culture
In order to foster a culture of safety, there must be a clear and
accessible mechanism for reporting safety concerns, and
those elevated through the system should be considered with
appropriate gravity, regardless of what role on the surgical
team the reporting individual holds. It is important for event
reporting systems to be agile and able to respond to concerns
in a timely fashion, with investigations striving to promote a
just culture and examine the role of both systems and indi-
viduals in safety errors. Finally, when individuals who occupy
a more junior role express concerns about those in senior
positions, there should be clarity and transparency regarding
how those individuals will be held accountable. Organizations
must support and protect those who identify safety concerns
to ensure those who report will not experience any form of
retaliation. Emphasizing an organizational culture of not just
safety but accountability is key to optimizing safety event
reporting system.


Standardized Communication
In addition to a positive and robust reporting system, adopt-
ing standardized communication methods positively impacts
patient safety. Examples include standardized preoperative
time-outs, postoperative debrief, or the use of checklists prior
to performing complicated tasks. Work in the area of surgical
checklists by the World Health Organization demonstrated
the utilization of surgical checklists resulted in reduced mor-
tality [30]. Utilization of communication tools such as a surgi-
cal time-out previously demonstrated improvement in team
perception of safety culture [31]. Introducing standardizing
communication tools aides in the mitigation of safety risks
associated with the increasing complexity of surgical care and
the challenging workload facing today’s surgeon. Furthermore,
Chapter 26.   Culture of Safety and Era of Better Practices    497

adopting these techniques to establish a routine for
­communication helps to flatten the hierarchy in surgical care
 and creates a safe space for all team members to express
 concerns.


A Focus on Teamwork
A culture of safety cannot be achieved without a specific
focus on team dynamics. The key report “To Err is Human”
by the Institute of Medicine highlighted effective team func-
tioning as one of its five values for creating safe hospitals [32].
All team members should participate in rigorous training
efforts to increase skill in interprofessional communication
and emphasize the value of team members across roles and
levels of seniority. A team training approached previously
studied by the Veterans Health Administration demonstrated
a 17% reduction in surgical morbidity after implementation
[33]. In addition to training on team dynamics, surgeons and
those they work with closely in patient care environments
should receive education on the impact of bias and discrimi-
nation in the workplace. Understanding the challenges
women and underrepresented minorities experience in
healthcare is critical to establishing a supportive workplace
that promotes a culture of safety. Furthermore, recent formal
recommendations by the American College of Surgeons Task
Force on Racial Issues includes training on topics of diversity,
equity, and inclusion for surgical departments [34].


Surgical Leadership
Though we have seen significant efforts to flatten hierarchy
within surgery and discourage a perception that the surgeon
is the sole leading voice in the operating room, it remains a
reality that surgeons are in a critical leadership role on the
operating room team. We have a tremendous ability to sup-
498   E. R. Smith and S. R. Eckhouse

port a culture of safety in our operating rooms by setting
clear expectations, communicating effectively, and modeling
professional and respectful behavior. Effective surgical lead-
ership can have a demonstrable impact on patient care; work
by Dimick et al. found surgeons with constructive leadership
styles had lower rates of adverse outcomes [35]. A key part of
these efforts is soliciting feedback from team members and
accepting responsibility for errors. Through these behaviors,
surgeons can personally promote a culture of safety in their
work environments.


Conclusion
There exist numerous and diverse barriers to achieving a true
culture of safety and attaining best practices for patient safety
within surgery. The culture of surgery itself with its emphasis
on hierarchy and prior tolerance for difficult behavior makes
it especially difficult for surgical specialties to create and sus-
tain an environment where all team members feel their con-
cerns will be heard. Surgery is only increasing in its complexity,
and effective communication remains critical to avoiding
poor outcomes. Despite these challenges, the surgical com-
munity can still rigorously pursue best practices. Adoption of
strong organizational policies that work to flatten the hierar-
chy, support and promote reporting of safety events, and
deliver training in areas of communication, leadership, and
bias can help shift healthcare systems closer to that ideal cul-
ture of safety. These efforts can be furthered by utilizing
standardized methods for communicating inside and outside
the operating room that help to minimize loss of information
during care and create ample opportunities for team mem-
bers to voice concerns. By recognizing the key barriers to a
culture of safety and working to overcome them, we can
deliver care in an era of better practices while we pursue our
ideal.
Chapter 26.    Culture of Safety and Era of Better Practices      499

References
 1. Fan CJ, Pawlik TM, Daniels T, et al. Association of safety cul-
    ture with surgical site infection outcomes. J Am Coll Surg.
    2016;222:122–8.
 2. Odell DD, Quinn CM, Matulewicz RS, et al. Association between
    hospital safety culture and surgical outcomes in a statewide
    surgical quality improvement collaborative. J Am Coll Surg.
    2019;229:175–83.
 3. Commission J. 11 tenets of a safety culture.
 4. Pronovost PJ, Berenholtz SM, Goeschel CA, et al. Creating
    high reliability in health care organizations. Health Serv Res.
    2006;41:1599–617.
 5. Boysen PG 2nd. Just culture: a foundation for balanced account-
    ability and patient safety. Ochsner J. 2013;13:400–6.
 6. Sexton JB, Thomas EJ, Helmreich RL. Error, stress, and team-
    work in medicine and aviation: cross sectional surveys. BMJ.
    2000;320:745–9.
 7. Kellogg KC, Breen E, Ferzoco SJ, Zinner MJ, Ashley
    SW. Resistance to change in surgical residency: an ethnographic
    study of work hours reform. J Am Coll Surg. 2006;202:630–6.
 8. Barzallo Salazar MJ, Minkoff H, Bayya J, et al. Influence of sur-
    geon behavior on trainee willingness to speak up: a randomized
    controlled trial. J Am Coll Surg. 2014;219:1001–7.
 9. Belyansky I, Martin TR, Prabhu AS, et al. Poor resident-­attending
    intraoperative communication may compromise patient safety. J
    Surg Res. 2011;171:386–94.
10. Okuyama A, Wagner C, Bijnen B. Speaking up for patient safety
    by hospital-based health care professionals: a literature review.
    BMC Health Serv Res. 2014;14:61.
11. Bowman C, Neeman N, Sehgal NL. Enculturation of unsafe atti-
    tudes and behaviors: student perceptions of safety culture. Acad
    Med. 2013;88:802–10.
12. Rosenstein AH, O’Daniel M. Impact and implications of dis-
    ruptive behavior in the perioperative arena. J Am Coll Surg.
    2006;203:96–105.
13. Rosenstein AH, O’Daniel M. Disruptive behavior and clinical
    outcomes: perceptions of nurses and physicians. Am J Nurs.
    2005;105:54–64; quiz 64–55.
500    E. R. Smith and S. R. Eckhouse

14. Cooper WO, Guillamondegui O, Hines OJ, et al. Use of unsolic-
    ited patient observations to identify surgeons with increased risk
    for postoperative complications. JAMA Surg. 2017;152:522–9.
15. Keller S, Tschan F, Semmer NK, et al. “Disruptive behavior” in
    the operating room: a prospective observational study of triggers
    and effects of tense communication episodes in surgical teams.
    PLoS One. 2019;14:e0226437.
16. Christian CK, Gustafson ML, Roth EM, et al. A prospec-
    tive study of patient safety in the operating room. Surgery.
    2006;139:159–73.
17. Lingard L, Espin S, Whyte S, et al. Communication failures in
    the operating room: an observational classification of recurrent
    types and effects. Qual Saf Health Care. 2004;13:330–4.
18. Hu YY, Arriaga AF, Peyre SE, Corso KA, Roth EM, Greenberg
    CC. Deconstructing intraoperative communication failures. J
    Surg Res. 2012;177:37–42.
19. Magill ST, Wang DD, Rutledge WC, et al. Changing operating
    room culture: implementation of a postoperative debrief and
    improved safety culture. World Neurosurg. 2017;107:597–603.
20. ElBardissi AW, Wiegmann DA, Henrickson S, Wadhera R, Sundt
    TM 3rd. Identifying methods to improve heart surgery: an opera-
    tive approach and strategy for implementation on an organiza-
    tional level. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2008;34:1027–33.
21. Cooper-Patrick L, Gallo JJ, Gonzales JJ, et al. Race, gender,
    and partnership in the patient-physician relationship. JAMA.
    1999;282:583–9.
22. Traylor AH, Schmittdiel JA, Uratsu CS, Mangione CM,
    Subramanian U. The predictors of patient-physician race and
    ethnic concordance: a medical facility fixed-effects approach.
    Health Serv Res. 2010;45:792–805.
23. Torres MB, Salles A, Cochran A. Recognizing and reacting
    to microaggressions in medicine and surgery. JAMA Surg.
    2019;154:868–72.
24. Hu YY, Ellis RJ, Hewitt DB, et al. Discrimination, abuse, harass-
    ment, and burnout in surgical residency training. N Engl J Med.
    2019;381:1741–52.
25. Catchpole K, Perkins C, Bresee C, et al. Safety, efficiency and
    learning curves in robotic surgery: a human factors analysis. Surg
    Endosc. 2016;30:3749–61.
26. Mathew R, Markey K, Murphy J, Brien BO. Integrative lit-
    erature review examining factors affecting patient safety with
Chapter 26.      Culture of Safety and Era of Better Practices       501

      robotic-assisted and laparoscopic surgeries. J Nurs Scholarsh.
      2018;50:645–52.
27.   Yang C, Heinze J, Helmert J, Weitz J, Reissfelder C, Mees
      ST. Impaired laparoscopic performance of novice surgeons due
      to phone call distraction: a single-centre, prospective study. Surg
      Endosc. 2017;31:5312–7.
28.   Avidan A, Yacobi G, Weissman C, Levin PD. Cell phone calls
      in the operating theater and staff distractions: an observational
      study. J Patient Saf. 2019;15:e52–5.
29.   Cox ML, Farjat AE, Risoli TJ, et al. Documenting or operating:
      where is time spent in general surgery residency? J Surg Educ.
      2018;75:e97–e106.
30.   Haynes AB, Weiser TG, Berry WR, et al. A surgical safety check-
      list to reduce morbidity and mortality in a global population. N
      Engl J Med. 2009;360:491–9.
31.   McLaughlin N, Winograd D, Chung HR, Van de Wiele B, Martin
      NA. Impact of the time-out process on safety attitude in a tertiary
      neurosurgical department. World Neurosurg. 2014;82:567–74.
32.   Institute of Medicine Committee on Quality of Health Care in
      A. In: Kohn LT, Corrigan JM, Donaldson MS, editors. To err
      is human: building a safer health system. Washington (DC):
      National Academies Press (US). Copyright 2000 by the National
      Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved; 2000.
33.   Young-Xu Y, Neily J, Mills PD, et al. Association between imple-
      mentation of a medical team training program and surgical mor-
      bidity. Arch Surg. 2011;146:1368–73.
34.   American College of Surgeons Task Force on Racial Issues:
      Report of Recommendations. 2020.
35.   Shubeck SP, Kanters AE, Dimick JB. Surgeon leadership style and
      risk-adjusted patient outcomes. Surg Endosc. 2019;33(2):471–4.
Chapter 27
Learning New Operations
and Introduction into
Practice
Ugoeze J. Nwokedi, Lee Morris, and Nabil Tariq


Introduction
Surgery continues to be a rapidly innovative field. Over the
last three decades, we have seen the widespread adoption of
laparoscopy to span beyond general surgery, to include
colorectal, urology, gynecology, and thoracic surgery, in
addressing the burden of surgical disease. More recently,
robotic technology has also been added to the surgical
armamentarium of tools available for minimally invasive
­
approach to patient care in the twenty-first century.
    However, these rapid advancements in the field of gastro-
intestinal and endoscopic surgery bring along new challenges
that surgeons today must contend with. First, we need to
define a common nomenclature around the adoption of what
is considered a “new” procedure, surgical technique, or tech-
nology versus a modification or alternate use of existing
device or technique. Hutchinson et al. in their work attempt


U. J. Nwokedi · L. Morris · N. Tariq (*)
Department of Surgery, The Houston Methodist Hospital,
Houston, TX, USA
e-mail: LMMorris@Houstonmethodist.org;
ntariq@houstonmethodist.org

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature   503
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_27
504   U. J. Nwokedi et al.

to lay out an original definition of the term “surgical innova-
tion” (Table 27.1) that meets robust criteria that can be reli-
ably and prospectively applied to both “new” techniques and
devices [1]. They describe whether the innovative technique
is entirely new to the field, new to an anatomic location, or
new to a specific patient group. Similarly, they describe
whether the innovative device is new to the field, new to an
anatomical location, or new to a patient group. This is paired
with a practical day-to-day survey termed the Macquarie
Surgical Innovation Identification Tool (Fig. 27.1) that sur-
geons can utilize in identifying “new” innovation. This again
differentiates if a procedure is new to the hospital, new to the
surgeon, new to the field, or new to a particular patient group.
This proposed theoretical framework could obviate the
nuances surrounding the deployment of these specific termi-
nologies in the field and help structure a standardized
approach with regard to the introduction of surgical innova-
tion from the industry.
   Drawbacks of the aforementioned framework are reflected
in its identification of “new” technique or technology. Most
surgeons would agree that in daily practice, they repurpose
existing technology or technique distinct from what is cap-
tured by the Macquarie Surgical Innovation Identification
Tool. It is therefore important to describe the alternatives to
“new” technique or technology as these may have practical
implications, for example, with regard to credentialing and
privileging at the institutional level and perhaps more impor-
tantly, patient safety.
   In August 2014, the Society of American Gastrointestinal
and Endoscopic Surgeons (SAGES) and its Board of
Governors approved expert consensus statements outlining
the adoption of new technology and techniques [2]. Outlined
in these committee statements are further definitions of
“new” and “modified” terminology to capture the breadth of
possibilities that may arise in clinical practice. The SAGES
Guideline Committee definitions are listed below and sup-
plement the aforementioned framework:
                Chapter 27. Learning New Operations…              505

Table 27.1 A definition of innovative surgery with illustrative
examples
An innovative surgical procedure is any procedure that meets 1
or more of the following criteria:
          Criteria                 Examples
1         Innovative technique: Different incision position
          The technique used       or size; combination of two
          is new or differs        procedures such as mastectomy
          from the standard        and reconstruction; extension
          technique in one         of microsurgical techniques;
          or more of the           established procedure
          following ways:          undertaken on a different
                                   category of patient
 1a    Altogether new          Pioneering transplant surgery,
                                 e.g., first heart transplant, first
                                 face transplant, first uterus
                                 transplant; use of hypothermia
                                 for neurosurgery
 1b    New to anatomical       Novel anatomical approach
         locationa               for existing procedure; use
                                 of established anastomotic
                                 techniques in new locations
 1c    New to patient group    Expansion of indications
                                 to groups whose surgical
                                 outcomes may be different,
                                 such as children; people with
                                 comorbidities likely to influence
                                 surgical outcomes; patients of a
                                 different sex
or
2        Innovative device:      Surgical robot; new hip
         The tools or devices    prosthesis; implant made
         used are new, or        from new material; use of
         the use differs from    laparoscope to perform
         standard use in one     procedure usually done without
         of the following ways   one; use of adult device or tool
         described:              on a child
                                                          (continued)
506     U. J. Nwokedi et al.

Table 27.1 (continued)
An innovative surgical procedure is any procedure that meets 1
or more of the following criteria:
          Criteria                 Examples
 2a      Altogether new           Invention of the da Vinci robot;
                                    first use of laparoscope; first
                                    use of the endotracheal tube for
                                    anesthesia
 2b      New to anatomical        Application of laparoscopic
           locationa                instruments or robotic surgery
                                    to new organ or body cavity
 2c      New to patient group     Use of device or tools in groups
                                    whose surgical outcomes may
                                    be different, such as children;
                                    people with comorbidities likely
                                    to influence surgical outcomes;
                                    patients of a different sex
From: Hutchinson et al. [1], with permission
a
  Here we exclude procedures, such as fixation of fractures, which are
not standardized to a particular anatomical location


1. Modified Device: existing device the surgeon has experi-
   ence with that has been altered to improve functionality or
   performance, e.g., a modified stapler, a new mesh, etc.
2. New Device: product of disruptive innovation or device
   that has not been previously used by surgeons. Includes
   modified devices that surgeons have no prior experience
   with, e.g., endoscopic hemoclips, when surgeons have not
   used similar clips before.
3. Modified Procedure: modification of known procedure or
   technique. Surgeons have experience with similar proce-
   dures/techniques, e.g., a surgeon experienced with laparo-
   scopic Nissen wants to perform a laparoscopic Toupet
   fundoplication or a surgeon who performs a laparoscopic
   bypass wants to adopt laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy.
4. New Procedure: novel technique that differs dramatically
   from what surgeons are used to or technique not previously
                          Chapter 27. Learning New Operations…                              507

1. The techniques, instruments and/or devices to be used in the operation for which the
   patient has consented:

    1a. Have all been used before in this hospital                               Yes   No
    1b. Have all been used before in this surgeon                                Yes   No

  A `No’ response for either of these item identifies first performance of the
  intervention by the surgeon, or introduction of the intervention to the
  institution. This may flag innovation if the intervention has never been
  performed elsewhere. Further details should be requested regarding
  requirements for training and supervision, change in resources, extent of
  patient communication, and prior experience of the intervention elsewhere.


2. The conditions under which this operation will take place do not depart from those under
   which such a procedure would usually occur, for example the techniques, instruments
   and/or devices to be used in the operation for which the patient has consented are routinely
   used:

    2a. For this indication                                                      Yes   No
    2b. In patients of this sex (where sex differences relevant)                 Yes   No
    2c. In patients of this age (c.f. pediatric and elderly patients)            Yes   No
    2d. In patients with this comorbidity                               N/A      Yes   No

 A `No’ response for any of these items suggests that innovation may be
 occurring. Further details should be requested regarding the surgeon’s
 knowledge of likely outcomes of the procedure, whether the outcomes of the
 surgery are likely to be of interest to surgical peers (e.g. publishable) and
 whether special preparations are needed (such as training, or special
 instructions to the anesthetist or to the preoperative, perioperative or
 postoperative teams).



Figure 27.1 Macquarie surgical innovation identification tool. This
is a practical tool to identify potentially innovative procedures to
prompt appropriate support. (From: Hutchinson et al. [1], with per-
mission)

   used by surgeons, e.g., POEM vs. laparoscopic myotomy or
   adaptation of a laparoscopic or robotic procedure by an
   open surgeon.
    These definitions of specific terminology play a critical
first step by providing language commonality for surgeons
and administrators to utilize in developing policy and regula-
tions around implementation of new procedures, techniques,
or technology at the institutional level. The appropriate ter-
minology could also redefine current procedural terminology
(CPT) codes which invariably are tied to the healthcare reim-
bursements that hospitals and surgeons receive from
508   U. J. Nwokedi et al.

insurance agencies. Therefore, appropriate designation of
either “new” or “modified” terminology to surgical tech-
niques and technology as it is incorporated into the clinical
setting could have important financial implications as well.
   Some of the criticisms of developing strict definitions
around surgical innovation could be the ensuing regulatory
oversight which ultimately gets translated into both privileg-
ing and credentialing processes for surgeons, as well as day-­to-­
day practice [1, 3]. This inadvertently could potentially
discourage the widespread adoption of these terms by sur-
geons. The reality today for surgeons undergoing the privileg-
ing and credentialing process is that in most institutions, it is
more often than not cumbersome and time consuming. It is
then not too surprising that in the era of increasing adminis-
trative responsibilities placed on surgeons, especially with
tedious electronic medical record documentation and billing,
this additional regulatory oversight is yet another aspect of
patient care that the modern surgeon needs to balance with
other clinical responsibilities. While it is safe to say no expedi-
tious solutions to this dilemma exist, defining common termi-
nology as we integrate surgical innovation into patient care is
a necessary first step that carries both legal and patient safety
ramifications for clinical practice. Thus, the ensuing discussion
will employ these definitions to designate “new or innovative”
or “modified” techniques and technology in our discussion.
   Finally, as we continue to make progress in the ever-­
changing field of surgery, we ought to have in place specific
pathways to guide practicing surgeons on how best to adapt
to the modern practice of surgery. Not surprisingly, surgical
societies often play a significant role as flagship organizations
to further delineate these responsibilities. Invariably, sur-
geons adopting new technology and techniques have to abide
by their institution-specific privileging and credentialing cri-
teria. Paramount to the success of effective adoption of new
technique and technology is addressing the knowledge gap in
safely integrating these new technologies into day-to-day
surgical practice while maintaining delivery of high-value and
high-quality healthcare to our patients. In this chapter, we
                Chapter 27. Learning New Operations…       509

will highlight the hurdles met in instituting a uniform frame-
work around incorporating surgical technology at the local
level and provide some practical guidelines and checklists for
practicing surgeons to utilize in establishing their implemen-
tation framework.


 hat Different Steps Need to Be Taken
W
to Evaluate New Technology and Surgical
Techniques?
Implementing new technology and surgical techniques
(NT&T) into clinical medicine can be highly rewarding to
both patients and care providers but may also cause harm if
the technology or new surgical technique is not appropriately
evaluated to determine its true safety and efficacy.
Determining the safety and efficacy of a surgical technology
or new procedure is a complex task as surgical research is dif-
ficult on many levels. To help assist the surgical innovator in
evaluating NT&T, a general framework has been suggested
to be of benefit.
   The IDEAL (Idea, Development, Exploration, Assessment,
Long-term monitoring) framework is one such paradigm to
guide innovators in producing high-quality surgical studies
for each stage of evolution of the particular NT&T. The
IDEAL framework began in Oxford, England, from 2007 to
2009 to discuss the specific challenges of evaluating surgical
innovation. These discussions resulted in a publication of a
five-stage framework describing the natural stages of surgical
innovation. The IDEAL framework was established to pro-
vide a pathway for evaluating surgical innovations at each
stage of their development [4]. Each stage is defined by a key
research question:
• Stage 1 (Idea): What is the new treatment concept and why
  is it needed?
• Stage 2a (Development): Has the new intervention reached
  a state of stability sufficient to allow replication by
  others?
510   U. J. Nwokedi et al.

• Stage 2b (Exploration): Have the questions that might
  compromise the chance of conducting a successful RCT
  been addressed?
• Stage 3 (Assessment): How does the new intervention
  compare with current practice?
• Stage 4 (Long-term study): Are there any long-term or
  rare adverse effects or changes in indications or delivery
  quality over time?
   Various users and funders of research have acknowledged
the utility of IDEAL; however, use has remained somewhat
limited. For this reason, more recently, it has been updated to
help clarify and offer more detailed guidance about how to
implement the updated recommendations [5]. Updated
descriptions of the IDEAL framework and stage appropriate
study designs are briefly summarized as follows:
   The Pre-IDEAL stage is research prior to first human tri-
als of an innovation. Appropriate preclinical studies include
material testing, simulator, cadaver, animal, modeling, and
cost-effectiveness studies. Stage 1 (Idea) describes the first
use of a new procedure or device in a patient. Appropriate
studies involve a single case or a few cases. It is recom-
mended that reports explain the need for the new treatment
concept and why it might be better than currently available
treatment. Video recording and sharing is highly recom-
mended and can be part of online publication. Stage 2a
(Development) involves modifying procedures toward a
final stable version. Appropriate studies are small single cen-
ter prospective trials. A typology which deconstructs inter-
ventions into their c­ omponent parts may help with precise
definition of procedures and clarify description of which
parts of the procedure change as it is modified and updated.
Stage 2b (Exploration) is a stage where the main purpose is
to gain greater experience of the new intervention in a wider
group of surgeons and patients. This will allow more infor-
mation to be collected, which will determine whether and
how to progress to a definitive comparison against current
best treatment.Appropriate studies are typically collaborative
                Chapter 27. Learning New Operations…      511

multicenter prospective studies and determine the feasibility
of a RCT. Stage 3 (Assessment) is a pivotal comparative
evaluation stage that usually occurs against the current stan-
dard treatment. Appropriate studies are a multi-surgeon,
multicenter RCT when feasible. Variants, including cluster-­
randomized or expertise-based RCTs or stepped wedge
designs, may be appropriate. Stage 4 (Long-term study)
proposes registries for data collection. Their strength lies in
recognizing late or uncommon safety outcomes. Key design
issues for registries center on the dataset and on fostering
engagement. Datasets should be as small and cheap to col-
lect as possible, while reliably capturing patient and device/
procedure identity, diagnosis, and the key influences on out-
come [5].
   The IDEAL framework is just one example of a stepwise
evaluation tool to help innovators evaluate more accurately
the safety and efficacy of complex interventions or new tech-
nology. Tools such as this are widely accepted as necessary in
evaluating NT&T and to prevent adverse events or wide
adoption of NT&T that later proves to be harmful.


 hat Are the Surgeon’s Responsibilities
W
to Start NT&T?
Today, new technology and new and more advanced surgical
procedures are being introduced with ever-increasing fre-
quency. To prevent from being left behind, modern surgeons
must stay aware of new therapies and technology and find
ways to safely implement these changes into their practice.
However, for busy practicing surgeons, learning new tech-
niques and implementing them safely can be a challenging
task. One of the initial steps after identification of the new
technique for implementation is proper training in order to
acquire competence and proficiency. Learning any new tech-
nique to the expert level requires time and dedication. The
amount of time to adequately learn the NT&T and overcome
512   U. J. Nwokedi et al.

the learning curve is often underestimated. Practicing sur-
geons must consider what tools are available to help them
minimize the impact of a learning curve on their patient’s
outcomes.
   Traditionally, short courses offered over weekends to
accommodate practicing surgeons’ busy schedules were the
only training available. However, higher complication rates
have been reported for such techniques as laparoscopic sur-
gery when training was limited to short courses held over a
weekend [6]. What additional options are then available to
surgeons trying to modernize their practice or stay on the
forefront of treatment options? SAGES has outlined addi-
tional modalities that may be helpful and beneficial to sur-
geons learning NT&T [2]. Some examples include informal
familiarization of surgeon with device or procedure before
introduction, review of existing data/literature, pursuit of
expert input, video review of device use or procedure, prac-
tice on appropriate simulated models (e.g., realistic or virtual
reality), practice on animate models, practice on cadavers or
cadaveric tissues, participation at courses at society meetings
(e.g., SAGES, ACS), participation in online courses, comple-
tion of formal training (e.g., fellowship), proctored initial
cases, tele-proctoring of initial cases, and team training (if
applicable). However, knowing where to start may be diffi-
cult and appropriate pathways are not well defined in many
situations. Creating a learning contract has been suggested as
a good place to start [7]. The learning contract starts with stat-
ing your goal. The learning contract includes your timeline,
the steps you will take to learn the technique, and who you
will engage to assist you with this task. The more modalities
you implement as listed above, the greater the depth of your
learning and the higher the likelihood that your implementa-
tion of NT&T will be successful.
   Several barriers will inevitably need to be overcome to
become competent in performing a new procedure. To illus-
trate this, we will outline a real-world example of the pathway
one of the authors took to implement NT&T in their practice.
As a relatively new faculty member, he set out to learn Per
                Chapter 27. Learning New Operations…      513

Oral Endoscopic Myotomy (POEM) after completing a fel-
lowship in minimally invasive surgery, which included only a
limited number of therapeutic endoscopic cases but intro-
duced our author to POEM (this procedure was still in the
early phases of clinical experience). Our hospital had devel-
oped POEM privileging guidelines for the operating room,
which also required surgeons to have upper endoscopy privi-
leges in the general endoscopy center. The gastroenterologist-­
managed endoscopy center required a minimum of 200 upper
endoscopies for privileging, which the author had not met
despite the fellowship training and was unable to perform
endoscopies at any other facilities as the author was an
employed physician and this was not permitted under the
hospital credentialing contract. So, in order to obtain privi-
leges for POEM at our institution, additional POEM training
was needed as well as credentialing for upper endoscopies in
the GI endoscopy center. Through mentors within the depart-
ment, a pathway was instituted that allowed for completion
of the privileging requirements. The pathway was a program
sponsored by SAGES and industry that offered advanced
flexible endoscopy training to practicing surgeons. The pro-
gram comprised two phases of training: first a 3-day hands-on
training course in the USA with explant models, followed by
a 2-week clinical hands-on advanced training at a high-­
volume international site, which included over 300 upper and
lower endoscopies during the 2-week training period. Their
POEM volume is also exceedingly high and on average a
POEM per day was achieved with hands-on experience.
Following completion of this program, credentialing require-
ments were met that then allowed for privileging for POEM
after five proctored cases. This is just one of many possible
pathways and no one pathway fits every surgeon or all
NT&T. However, with adequate persistence and institutional
support, a successful pathway can be managed and inevitable
barriers overcome.
   On the other hand, surgeons who want to incorporate a
new technology into a procedure they already perform such
as performing a procedure using a surgical robot in lieu of a
514   U. J. Nwokedi et al.

laparoscopic approach may face fewer barriers to success. In
order to ensure and maintain the highest level of care,
SAGES has outlined guidelines for training and credentialing
on this topic [8]. The basic premise for credentialing is that
the surgeon must have the judgment and training to safely
complete the procedure intended, as well as have the capabil-
ity of immediately proceeding to an alternative therapy when
circumstances indicate. There are two broad aspects to train-
ing with robotic systems. The first is technical training and
capability. The second aspect of training involves the use of
the robot for specific operations. Currently, the Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) has in place a mandate that
companies provide at least some of this training; at thus, at a
minimum, surgeons must be trained to meet these FDA
standards.
   Training recommendations for surgeons without residency
and/or fellowship training that included structured experi-
ence in therapeutic robotic procedures should mandate a
structured curriculum. The curriculum should be defined by
the institution and should include didactic education on the
specific technology and an educational program for the
specialty-­specific approach to the organ systems. Hands-on
training, which includes experience with the device in a dry
lab environment as well as a specialty-specific model which
may include animal, cadaveric, and/or virtual reality and
simulation modeling, is necessary. Observation of live cases
should be considered mandatory as well. Initial clinical expe-
rience on the specific procedure must be undertaken under
the review of an expert and may include assisting and/or
proctoring. An adequate number of cases to allow proficient
completion of the procedure should be performed with this
expert review. Criteria of competency as determined by the
expert should be established in advance and should include
evaluation of familiarity with instrumentation and equip-
ment, competence in their use, appropriateness of patient
selection, clarity of dissection, safety, and successful comple-
tion of the procedure [6].
                 Chapter 27. Learning New Operations…                515

 hat Are Institution-Level Responsibilities
W
to Start NT&T?
As the pace of innovation is increasing, there are institutional-­
level responsibilities that have to be carried out as well.
Institutional credentialing pathways have to keep up with the
ability to introduce procedures that are either new to the
institution or new to the field in general. These have to be
anticipated in advance rather than coming up with last min-
ute accommodations so appropriate balance can be struck
between innovation and patient safety.
    In the SAGES guidelines (which are based on available
literature and expert opinion), the recommendation to the
question of who should monitor the introduction of new pro-
cedures was given as follows:
  “To protect their patients, surgeons should demonstrate the high-
  est level of professionalism and exercise self-assessment and self-­
  regulation when introducing new technology and techniques in
  their practice. Besides the FDA, which regulates the production
  and sale of new devices, institutional credentialing and/or new
  technology committees and the IRB should monitor their intro-
  duction in clinical practice. The introduction of novel procedures
  should be overseen by the credentialing committee and/or the
  IRB, while the role of specialty societies and new technology
  committees needs further assessment.” [2]



 ho Approves and Monitors the Introduction
W
of New Procedures?
Though self-assessment and self-regulation remains very
important to ensure patient safety, it cannot be relied upon as
one of the only safeguards. There are multiple factors that can
influence the surgeon’s decision to adopt a new procedure or
using a new device/platform. These factors include pressures
from industry or the healthcare systems, marketing pressures
from patients and competing with colleagues, the novelty of a
new procedure, or simply the desire to provide the most up-­
to-­date care for their patients [2]. Due to these pressures, it’s
516   U. J. Nwokedi et al.

reasonable to conclude that someone other than the surgeons
should also be involved in approval and subsequent monitor-
ing of new procedures.
   In the SAGES guidelines, for the device modification cat-
egory, a majority agreed that surgeons themselves should be
able to monitor the introduction of NT&T into their practice.
For new devices, again it was surgeons themselves as well as
the FDA that were considered the best options, with the cre-
dentialing committee and new technology committee moni-
toring new devices as well. For entirely new procedures, the
credentialing committee of the institution would be the most
important monitoring entity, followed by the surgeons and
the IRB. Specialty societies could also play a role in this
aspect, but it is unclear how they would do so at the local
level. There are certain prerequisite elements that have been
described as important for introduction of new procedures.
This includes being credentialed by the local institution to
perform procedures on the affected organ system.


 hat Should Be Assessed Before and After
W
Introduction of a New Procedure?
It is important to establish safety, efficacy, and cost-­
effectiveness of any new procedure that is going to be
adopted. Currently, one of the tools used for this assessment
is health technology assessments (HTAs) [9]. These include
effectiveness compared to alternative treatments or proce-
dures, the safety profile, the cost compared to existing thera-
pies, and patient outcomes. National societies such as SAGES
have now created committees such as the Technology and
Value Assessment Committee (TAVAC) that have been
tasked to generate HTAs for minimally invasive surgery.
   It is important to distinguish between the introduction of
new technology and a new technique or procedure. The path-
ways for introduction and subsequent monitoring for a modi-
fied device versus a new device or technology and that of a
new procedure will be different. It is also relevant whether
                Chapter 27. Learning New Operations…        517

that it is new procedure for the field or just new procedure
locally for the surgeon as previously described.
    In an academic setting, the Surgery Department Chair
plays an important role in approving and/or recommending
the initiation of a new procedure or technology at the hospital,
as well as signing off on privileges for the practitioner. They
may know and understand the current capabilities of the
requesting surgeon and may have a better understanding of
the training and courses taken thus far in preparation for the
new procedure. They will also be able to follow the early expe-
rience closely and review the early patient outcomes closely as
well. In smaller private and community hospitals, however,
this can be less relevant. The Surgery Chair may be someone
related to a completely different specialty (i.e., orthopedic
surgery) and may not have the administrative setup or know-
how to make a judgment on the practitioner’s training and
courses thus far and to follow the outcomes as closely.
    Though national organizations and societies can provide
guidelines regarding credentialing and privileging to perform
a new procedure, this still largely remains the local institu-
tion’s responsibility. They are responsible for verifying the
requesting practitioner’s training and determining its rele-
vance and adequacy. Each institution may have its own sys-
tem of privileging related to new procedures. The committee
responsible needs to take into account guidance from existing
literature as to what constitutes a completely new procedure
or use of a completely new device versus what’s a modified
device in a modified or adaptation of a procedure and where
there is overlap. Care must be taken to keep the credentialing
and privileging process as objective as possible, as not to
allow competing groups and local hospital politics to creep
into the decision-making. Ultimately, each surgeon and insti-
tution bear the primary responsibility for establishing an
appropriate and fair system that strikes the right balance
between innovation and ensuring patient safety. Both the
surgeon and institution have the most “skin in the game,”
aside from the patient, to ensure this is done appropriately as
they may also have the highest liability risk.
518   U. J. Nwokedi et al.

 hat Is the Pathway to Surgeon Credentialing
W
and Privileging for NT&T?
Utilizing correct terminology is very important. Credentialing
refers to the verification of the surgeon’s training, education,
malpractice claims, professionalism, etc. Privileging was
defined as the surgeon’s scope of practice and the clinical
services they can provide [9]. Since there isn’t good data avail-
able to guide the privileging committees regarding the num-
ber of procedures needed for competency in most of the new
procedures, and taking into account differing learning curves
of surgeons, it is difficult to set a minimum number of proce-
dures with confidence. As mentioned earlier, apart from hav-
ing the privileges of working in that specific organ system, the
level of training obtained and verified will depend on the
complexity of the procedure and new technology. The Society
of Thoracic Surgery (STS) task force suggested that due to
the variability in complexity of new procedures and technol-
ogy, it is difficult to set a defined pathway that can be applied
to all new privileges being requested. A better approach
would be to stress the importance of preparation to align the
surgeon’s existing skill set with the complexity of the new
procedure or technology being implemented [9]. The
­hospital’s normal credentialing and privileging process may
 not include the ability or expertise to pass judgment on a new
 technology or procedure being requested. Larger institutions
 may have an innovation/new technology committee or a spe-
 cialty committee that can collaborate. Smaller institutions
 may need to seek guidance from a local or regional larger
 institution as a consulting service.
    The American College of Surgeons (ACS) has defined a
 five-level verification model for documenting a surgeon’s
 participation in educational programs and assessment of their
 knowledge and skills [6, 9]. These five levels include verifica-
 tion of attendance, verification of satisfactory completion of
 course objectives, verification of knowledge and skills, verifi-
 cation of preceptor experience, and demonstration of satis-
 factory patient outcomes. Building upon these levels,
                 Chapter 27. Learning New Operations…             519

Blackmon et al. proposed five levels of supervision when
training for new procedures as shown in Table 27.2 [9]. These
levels can be used to standardize educational course certifica-
tions to better understand the depth of training and verifica-
tion the participant went through. The Joint Commission
recommends that practitioners applying for new privileges
undergo a focused professional practice evaluation (FPPE)
[9]. This in turn can be used by hospital credentialing and
privileging committees to assess readiness. Most of the time,
if a FPPE is requested, data will have to be collected prospec-
tively, and institutional review board (IRB) approval and
safety monitoring will be needed. This is recommended by
most when performing a new procedure that is new to the
field not just new to the institution. This is needed when per-
forming research comparing the new technique or technology

Table 27.2 Five levels of supervision when training for new technol-
ogy and advanced procedures
Level 1 Certifies the learner attended a lecture or completed a
          lecture format course (no verification of skills)
Level 2   Certifies the learner completed a course and was
          assessed with a test or other evaluation of training and
          was provided feedback regarding their assessment score
          (a better model incorporates a minimum pass rate)
Level 3   Certifies the instructor observed the learner perform a
          skill and verified completion of task(s). Alternatively,
          the learner completed a course and participated in a
          lecture and skills lab, allowing assessment of the skills
          on a synthetic or tissue-based model
Level 4   Certifies the learner performed the procedure on a
          patient in a clinical setting with supervision (proctor or
          preceptor)
Level 5   Certifies the learner performed a series of clinical cases,
          the outcomes of which have been reviewed and verified.
          An example of level 5 learning may be submitting a
          series of video-recorded cases with outcomes to a review
          committee for verification
Adapted from Blackmon et al. [9]
520   U. J. Nwokedi et al.

to existing therapy. There may be an established procedure
that has been performed for years in the field but involves a
technology that has been granted a humanitarian device
exemption (HDE) by the FDA like the gastric electrical
stimulator, for example. IRB approval is needed for HDEs.
When an FDA-approved device is used off-label, IRB
approval is not usually needed unless the use is novel and
there exists a lack of safety data. Of note, not only informed
consent but proper disclosure to patients is also recom-
mended in these circumstances as will be discussed later in
the chapter.
   Last but not least, since the highest priority needs to be
given to patient safety in any adoption of new technology, all
aspects have to be considered. The entire procedure team
plays a very important role in adoption and has to be involved
in the implementation. The team’s education has to be
planned out, including the equipment needed, number of
personnel to perform the procedure, failure scenarios, and
trouble shooting. Getting the procedure suite leadership
involved is key as well to making it all happen. Accounting
for all the various important aspects in getting started with a
new procedure, the STS has developed a checklist to use as a
guide for privileging as shown in Table 27.3 [9].


 hat Supervisory Options Are Available
W
to Surgeons Adopting NT&T: Preceptoring vs
Proctoring vs Telementoring?
Industry, institutions, and specialty societies are all stake-
holders in having programs for preceptorship and proctor-
ship to help surgeons learn new procedures. It is important
to clarify the differences between them. Preceptors are usu-
ally experts in the procedures being taught and their role is
to help a trainee acquire new skills. They usually assist in the
procedures and provide feedback to the learners to help
achieve learning objectives. They can take over the
                  Chapter 27. Learning New Operations…               521

Table 27.3 STS committee checklist for privileging
Verification of knowledge and skills assessment
 ABTS-eligible or ABTS-certified surgeon
 Documented completion of a course or didactic session
 For recent graduates of an accredited program, case logs and
   a program director letter attesting to competence
Team management
 Draft of implementation program complete
 Education plan for team members complete
 Crisis management plan complete
Institutional collaboration
 IRB and/or institutional innovative care/new technology
   committee approval
Monitoring of outcomes
 Participation in a continuous quality improvement committee
   and/or morbidity/mortality conference
 Participation in an auditable database (e.g., National Surgical
   Quality Improvement Program, STS National Database,
   Michigan Society of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgeons
   Quality Collaborative) or registry or shared database that is
   accessible by the host institution
 Demonstration of ability to present accurate and detailed
   morbidity and mortality rates to administration upon request
Patient-centered transparency
 Provide appropriate consent forms for IRB and/or innovative
   committee approval
 Provide the patient information on the risks and benefits
   of the new procedure, alternative treatments, general costs
   (i.e., to the patient or payer, or both), and comparative
   effectiveness of the new technology vs existing treatment
   options
                                                           (continued)
522    U. J. Nwokedi et al.

Table 27.3 (continued)
 Provide the patient with information on the surgeons training
   and experience to date
Adapted from Blackmon et al. [9]
ABTS American Board of Thoracic Surgery, IRB Institutional
Review Board, STS The Society of Thoracic Surgeons


care/surgery of the patient and carry more legal responsibil-
ity. An extended example of a preceptorship is a fellowship
or a mini-fellowship.
    Proctors also play an important role in the implementation
of new procedures. They are involved in assessment and veri-
fication of knowledge and skills of the learner. They can
provide feedback to the learner, but they generally do not
teach the learner. They also usually don’t scrub in the case
and thus can’t take over. The proctor reports their assessment
to the accreditation body, such as the hospital credentialing
committee. They are commonly used in assessment of sur-
geons starting new procedures in their practice as the logisti-
cal constraints are less, as is the legal risk for the proctor.
These differences are highlighted in Table 27.4.


Telementoring

Telementoring is a further development in this field. This is
especially relevant now since the COVID-19 pandemic. The
definition of telementoring is “a relationship, facilitated by
telecommunication technology, in which an expert (Mentor)
provides guidance to a less-experienced learner (Mentee)
from a remote location” [10]. Published systematic reviews on
this topic showed no difference in clinical or educational out-
comes for trainees that received on telementoring vs on-site
mentoring [11, 12]. Some of the studies (four studies or 33%
of them), in the most recent review, showed telementoring to
be inferior to on-site mentoring, for example, with increased
                  Chapter 27. Learning New Operations…              523

Table 27.4 Principal differences between the roles and responsibili-
ties of a preceptor and proctor
Preceptor
 Principal role is to help the surgeon learner acquire new
   surgical knowledge and skills during the steep portion of the
   learning curve
 Assesses and verifies the knowledge and skills of the surgeon
   learner to ensure achievement of learning objectives
 Always provides feedback to the learner
 Must be an expert in the performance of the new procedure
   or use of the new technology; such expertise is necessary for
   effective preceptoring
 Generally assists in the operation and is readily available to
   take charge if the need arises
 Associated with greater legal risk
 Logistics more complex
Proctor
 Principal role is to assess the knowledge and skills of the
   surgeon learner during the steep portion of the learning curve
 Assesses and verifies the knowledge and skills of the surgeon
   learner to report the results to the Chief of Surgery or the
   institutional credentialing committee
 May provide feedback to the learner
 Does not always need to be an expert in the performance of
   a new procedure or use of a new technology; such expertise is
   desirable but not always necessary for effective proctoring
 Generally serves as an observer
 Associated with lesser legal risk
 Logistics less complex
Adapted from Sacheva and Russell [6]
524   U. J. Nwokedi et al.

operative time; however, the majority showed telementoring
to be as effective as on-site mentoring [12]. Telementoring
was also thought to superior to no mentoring at all, but as the
authors admit to in the limitations in their study, the data
available has significant heterogeneity of the outcome mea-
sures and procedures [12]. Better designed studies are needed
to draw more meaningful conclusions about telementoring,
but it seems to be better than no mentoring, and maybe as
good as on-site mentoring. Due to the logistical and financial
challenges of on-site mentoring including its usually short
time span, telementoring may have the ability to be superior
as a training platform due to its ability to provide longitudinal
training and follow-up with less logistical strain on the sys-
tem. This recognition was the impetus for SAGES to convene
the “Project 6 Summit” and publish a white paper [10]. They
described the concerns regarding rapid adoption, using the
example of laparoscopic cholecystectomies and the increase
of common bile duct injuries by almost threefold initially.
This technique was mostly adopted after attending weekend-­
type short courses without much longitudinal guidance. In
contrast, there continue to be concerns about the very slow
adoption of laparoscopy for colectomies [10]. The “Project 6”
name was inspired by the military term “I got your six,”
meaning I got your back, describing the mentor and mentee
relationship. One of the main barriers identified was avail-
ability of adequate training for surgeons in practice so they
can feel comfortable to offer it to their patients. It may be
that for more complex minimally invasive procedures, with a
longer and steeper learning curve, more continued guidance
may be needed. Due to the evolving field of surgery, with
increased use of technology and new devices, surgeons may
be required to undergo additional training several times in
their career. A discussion of the details regarding the chal-
lenges and opportunities in telementoring is beyond the
scope of this chapter, but they laid out the various areas that
require work. These included legal and regulatory challenges
of medical licensing, credentialing, liability, privacy, and con-
sent. Business and value propositions for all the stakeholders
                Chapter 27. Learning New Operations…         525

like the surgeon (trainee), the hospital, industry, health insur-
ance, and government are key areas as well. This would
require a coordinated effort by all the stakeholders for suc-
cess. They also include establishing appropriate communica-
tion and education requirements for the trainees so the
training episodes can be efficient and effective. They also
discussed technology limitations, logistics, and requirements
to advance the field forward [12].


 hat Is the Role of Surgical Societies
W
in NT&T?
Expert consensus from the SAGES guidelines suggested that
health technology assessments for new procedures should be
done by medical societies while keeping the patient’s inter-
ests as a priority. Keeping this as an active committee that
works to provide timely information regarding new proce-
dures can help surgeons and hospital credentialing commit-
tees to make appropriate decisions regarding adoption of
new procedures. Surgical societies can also play a role in help-
ing follow outcomes. Database management can be quite
challenging when left completely on a voluntary basis at and
the individual or local level. National databases like NSQIP
from the ACS can provide an important framework for data
collection and monitoring.
    To date, the most common way of learning a new proce-
dure after postgraduate training is through a hands-on course.
This is typically a 1-day or weekend course, with a cognitive
portion and a skills portion, usually on a simulated model like
a cadaver or porcine model [13]. The concern is that the
return on investment in such courses is very low, as most prac-
titioners fail to adopt in their practice what they have learned
at these courses [13, 14]. With rapid advances in most surgical
fields, nearly all surgeons will have to learn a new or modified
procedure at some point in their career. The surgical societies,
as advocates of surgeons and the surgical field itself, do and
can play an even more important role in ensuring safe and
526        U. J. Nwokedi et al.

timely adoption of new procedure, for the benefit of patients,
surgeons, and society in general. With these concerns in mind,
SAGES, through its Continuing Education Committee and its
Quality, Outcomes, and Safety Committee, developed a
hands-on course that employed standardized teaching tech-
niques at the annual meeting and included a subsequent
yearlong mentorship program. This was called the Acquisition
of Data for Outcomes and Procedure Transfer (ADOPT)
program.
   The course participants were paired with a faculty member
with whom they could communicate throughout the year to
help them with case selection, preparation, etc. for starting
new procedures in their practice. They were encouraged to
participate in web meetings and submit videos for critique if
needed. The timeline of training is shown in Fig. 27.2 [13]. The
participants’ experience was then compared to a standard
hands-on course at the same meeting. The ADOPT partici-
pants performed significantly more procedures over the
course of the first 3 months following the course compared to
the stand hands-on course as shown in Fig. 27.3 [13].
   Based on the positive results from the initial ADOPT
course in 2015, all participants enrolled in the SAGES 2016
Annual Meeting Hands-on Hernia course were included in
the ADOPT course (Fig. 27.3). This again demonstrated that
adoption rates of the learned procedures were higher than
before with increased confidence in participants as well [14].

                                                Enrollees
          Hernia hands on                         submit                                         Presentation of
              course:             Video-        videos for         Video                            results:
          SAGES meeting,           based         webinar          review                        SAGES meeting,
           Nashville, TN          webinar         review          webinar                         Boston, MA

        March               May             June         July               December
 2015                                                                                    2016
                April                                             November                           March


         Mentor-        International       Problem     3 month          Additional
         mentee             hernia          solving      survey       interaction with
         phone          collaboration       webinar                      members;
         calls in         facebook                                    develop SAGES
        advance            support                                      presentation
        of course



Figure 27.2 SAGES ADOPT program timeline 2015–2016.
(Adapted from Dort et al. [13])
                                                        Chapter 27. Learning New Operations…         527

                                            30
Procedures performed in 3 months (median)



                                            25                               Mesh insertion for ventral
                                                                             hernia repair

                                                  13
                                            20
                                                                             Open components
                                                                             separation technique
                                            15
                                                                             Laparoscopic primary
                                                  4.5
                                                                             ventral hernia repair
                                            10

                                                  6.5                        Open primary ventral
                                             5
                                                                   0.5
                                                                             hernia repair
                                                                    1
                                                   3                1
                                                                   1.5
                                            0
                                                 ADOPT          Standard
                                                                 training

Figure 27.3 Median number of procedures performed over
3 months following training for ADOPT and standard training
learners. (Adapted from Dort et al. [13])

This is thought to be in large part due to ongoing engagement
and mentorship. Several barriers to mentorship have been
described. These include time constraints, limited qualified
mentors, lack of mentorship training and differences related
to culture, and gender and generation gap between mentor
and mentee [14, 15]. The SAGES ADOPT program enabled
good mentorship by facilitating leaders in the field of hernia
surgery to be available through a structured program. The
program also mitigated potential barriers to good mentorship
by standardizing instruction and feedback delivery and by
selecting faculty from diverse backgrounds. As stated by Dort
et al., the ADOPT program “…underscores the importance
of standardized instruction by trained faculty, longitudinal
mentorship, and the creation of a community of practice/
learners as a forum for discussion and learning” [14].
528   U. J. Nwokedi et al.

   The surgical societies have an obligation not just to their
members and sponsors but also to the patients and society at
large. They can play a very important role in not just dissemi-
nation of the current “state of the science” information but
also providing structured programs, backed by science, to
increase adoption of new procedures. The surgeons/members
have trust and confidence in these societies to do the vetting
of appropriate programs and courses that they can then use
to learn new procedures. As with the program described ear-
lier where one of the authors went to India for additional
training or with the ADOPT program, they would not be pos-
sible without the leadership and guidance of the national and
international societies.


Ethics of Patient Disclosure
Patient safety is of utmost importance every time the deci-
sion is made to proceed with surgery. “Primum non nocere,”
the famous Hippocrates oath that guides our principal role
as physicians, translates to “First, do no harm.” As surgeons,
we bear the foremost responsibility of effectively detailing
the risks and benefits of a particular procedure to our
patient including a discussion of alternatives, and thus
obtaining “informed consent.” In the era of surgical innova-
tion, this is a delicate task for modern surgeons to balance,
and we need to be well equipped to handle the ethical ques-
tions that arise especially as we deploy such new techniques
and technology.
   New surgical techniques and procedures fall outside the
regulatory purview of the US Food and Drug Administration
(FDA). Consequently, innovative procedures that are not
performed under the supervision of IRB-approved research
protocols are regulated at the local institutional level, and as
a result, no uniform standards exist. Ultimately for patients,
this translates to variability in timing and access to new surgi-
cal techniques and procedures based on practice patterns in
their local community.
                Chapter 27. Learning New Operations…         529

   In 2014, SAGES released a detailed document outlining
important ethical questions that are relevant to the imple-
mentation of new surgical techniques and technology in sur-
gery [16]. In their manuscript, the authors pose six critical
ethical questions that currently exist:
1. How is the safety of a new technology or technique
   ensured?
2. What are the timing and process by which a new technol-
   ogy or technique is implemented at a hospital?
3. How are patients informed before undergoing a new tech-
   nology or technique?
4. How are surgeons trained and credentialed in a new tech-
   nology or technique?
5. How are the outcomes of a new technology or technique
   tracked and evaluated?
6. How are the responsibilities to individual patients and
   society at large balanced?
   This is followed by a thoughtful reflection on how best
institutional strategies and cohesive efforts can be made to
provide optimal execution of new surgical techniques in clini-
cal practice. While the nuances of their manuscript are out-
side the scope of this discussion, we do want to highlight one
of the key ethical and common questions that surgeons might
encounter as they integrate novel surgical technique into
their practice: How do we consent patients? This is an intro-
spective question that reflects the important underlying
theme of patient safety. When a patient is selected for a novel
procedure or technique, in reality we are accepting potential
morbidity and mortality that could very well befall patients
that are exposed to so-called early adopters of new tech-
niques and technology that is not present compared to the
standard of care. In the 1990s, before laparoscopic cholecys-
tectomy became standard of care, the learning curve associ-
ated with the operation most likely contributed to the
prevalence of common bile duct injuries [16, 17].
   The learning curve associated with the adoption of new
surgical technique into clinical practice poses a serious ethical
530   U. J. Nwokedi et al.

dilemma for the surgeon-patient relationship. In surgical
innovation, the inability of the surgeon-innovator to flatten
the learning curve without gaining experience from patients
in clinical practice compounds this ethical dilemma. Of note,
this dilemma is not entirely akin to the situation that exists
with trainees in surgical residency programs specifically in
two distinct ways. Firstly, residents are ultimately subject to
oversight from credentialed surgeons as mandated by
ACGME clinical competency guidelines [18]. Secondly,
surgeon-­innovators are typically experienced physicians with
demonstrated proficiency in their field of practice seeking
out a new skill set. Thus, surgical innovation portends a differ-
ent ethical entity.
    In 2014, Bracken-Roche et al. published a systematic
review regarding patient disclosure and autonomy in surgical
innovation [19]. In their manuscript, they highlight “four cen-
tral tension points” identified in the literature that impact the
patient disclosure process and autonomy. One of these points
is the “misconception” that patients might construe “new or
innovative” to mean better care for their surgical disease.
They also describe the notion of the skewed surgeon-­
innovator and patient relationship with its inherent asymmet-
ric power differential that exists – “patients feel they owe a
certain deference to surgeon.” This could be further exacer-
bated by the fact that “surgeons may lack objectivity when
they themselves are the innovator or strong supporters of the
innovation.” All of these contribute to a complicated disclo-
sure process that preserves patient autonomy and legal
determination.
    Against this backdrop, surgeons must understand and
develop equitable inclusion-exclusion criteria of patient
selection for novel procedures and techniques. At the crux of
this selection algorithm is patient-centered transparency.
Clear communication of known risks, benefits, long-term out-
comes if available, and how this novel technique compares to
the standard of care should be provided to the patient.
Conflicts of interests that exist, for example, any financial
relationships with medical industry sponsoring proposed
technique or device, must also be disclosed to the patient [17].
                  Chapter 27. Learning New Operations…            531

   Additionally, in our increasingly litigious society, the learn-
ing curve should be addressed as part of the disclosure pro-
cess [20]. In their manuscript, Healy and Samanta tackle the
ethical and legal implications of this learning curve in clinical
practice. As alluded to earlier, the “drive to … enhance (clini-
cal) outcomes places surgical innovation as pivotal to clinical
progress.” However, as the authors point out, this comes with
a learning curve that poses “material risk” to patients and
therefore subject to disclosure in law. Therefore, given this
legal precedence, the “performance data of a surgeon may be
a material factor for a patient in the consent process” and
ideally should be disclosed. An important final point to high-
light is that the decision to proceed or not is a shared decision
process between the surgeon and patient after weighing both
merits and risks of the proposed technique or technology.
   Finally, as surgeons, we must recognize biases inherent in
our role as physician. In essence, our duty is not just to our
individual patients at a single point in time. We also hold a
larger responsibility to society in our role as stewards of sur-
gical innovation in order to advance the fields of science and
surgery. We also ought to weigh the financial cost of imple-
menting new technology in today’s economy of ballooning
healthcare costs and be cognizant of our role in providing
cost-effective care to patients. Against this milieu of compet-
ing interests, we must always strive to provide high-quality
care to our patients as we make strides in surgical innovation
and technology.


References
 1. Hutchinson K, Rogers W, Eyers A, et al. Getting clearer about
    surgical innovation: a new definition and a new tool to support
    responsible practice. Ann Surg. 2015;262:949–54.
 2. SAGES. Guidelines for the introduction of new technology
    and techniques. Available at: https://www.sages.org/publications/
    guidelines/guidelines-­introduction-­new-­technology-­techniques/.
    Accessed 8 Aug 2020.
532    U. J. Nwokedi et al.

 3. Maddern GJ. Introduction of new surgical techniques and tech-
    nologies. ANZ J Surg. 2019;89:625–7.
 4. Khachane A, et al. Appraising the uptake and use of the IDEAL
    framework and recommendations: a review of the literature. Int
    J Surg. 2018;57:84–90.
 5. Hirst A, et al. No surgical innovation without evaluation: evolu-
    tion and further development of the IDEAL framework and
    recommendations. Ann Surg. 2019;269(2):211–20.
 6. Sacheva AK, Russell TR. Safe introduction of new procedures
    and emerging technologies in surgery: education, credentialing,
    and privileging. Surg Clin North Am. 2007;87(4):853–66, vi–vii.
 7. Murnaghan JJ. The learning curve and the practicing surgeon:
    Integrating a new skill and procedure into your practice. **2013.
 8. Herron DM, Marohn M, SMRSC Group. A consensus document
    on robotic surgery. Surg Endosc. 2008;22(2):313–25; discussion
    311–2.
 9. Blackmon SH, Cooke DT, Whyte R, et al. The Society of Thoracic
    Surgeons expert consensus statement: a tool kit to assist tho-
    racic surgeons seeking privileging to use new technology and
    perform advanced procedures in general thoracic surgery. Ann
    Thorac Surg. 2016;101(3):1230–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.atho-
    racsur.2016.01.061. PMID: 27124326.
10. Schlachta CM, Nguyen NT, Ponsky T, et al. Project 6 summit:
    SAGES telementoring initiative. Surg Endosc. 2016;30(9):3665–
    72. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00464-­0 16-­4988-­5. Epub 2016 Jun 6.
    PMID: 27270593.
11. Erridge S, Yeung DKT, Patel HRH, et al. Telementoring of sur-
    geons: a systematic review. Surg Innov. 2019;26(1):95–111. https://
    doi.org/10.1177/1553350618813250. Epub 2018 Nov 22. PMID:
    30465477.
12. Bilgic E, Turkdogan S, Watanabe Y, et al. Effectiveness of
    telementoring in surgery compared with on-site mentoring:
    a systematic review. Surg Innov. 2017;24(4):379–85. https://
    doi.org/10.1177/1553350617708725. Epub 2017 May 11. PMID:
    28494684.
13. Dort J, Trickey A, Paige J, et al. Hands-on 2.0: improving trans-
    fer of training via the Society of American Gastrointestinal
    and Endoscopic Surgeons (SAGES) Acquisition of Data for
    Outcomes and Procedure Transfer (ADOPT) program. Surg
    Endosc. 2017;31(8):3326–32. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00464-­0 16-­
    5366-­z. Epub 2016 Dec 30. PMID: 28039640.
                  Chapter 27. Learning New Operations…              533

14. Dort J, Trickey A, Paige J, et al. All in: expansion of the acquisi-
    tion of data for outcomes and procedure transfer (ADOPT)
    program to an entire SAGES annual meeting hands-on hernia
    course. Surg Endosc. 2018;32(11):4491–7. https://doi.org/10.1007/
    s00464-­0 18-­6196-­y. Epub 2018 May 1. PMID: 29717374.
15. Entezami P, Franzblau LE, Chung KC. Mentorship in surgical
    training: a systematic review. Hand (N Y). 2012;7(1):30–6. https://
    doi.org/10.1007/s11552-­0 11-­9379-­8. Epub 2011 Nov 29. PMID:
    23448749; PMCID: PMC3280364.
16. SAGES. Ethical considerations regarding the implementation of
    new technologies and techniques in surgery. Available at: https://
    www.sages.org/publications/guidelines/ethical-­considerations-­
    regarding-­i mplementation-­n ew-­t echnologies-­t echniques-­
    surgery/. Accessed 15 Aug 2020.
17. Sudarshan M, Blackmon S. Best practices for training, educating
    and introducing new techniques and technology into practice.
    Thorac Surg Clin. 2018;28:573–8.
18. ACGME. Common Program Requirements (Residency).
    Available at: https://www.acgme.org/Portals/0/PFAssets/
    ProgramRequirements/CPRResidency2020.pdf. Accessed 7 Sept
    2020.
19. Bracken-Roche D, Bell E, Karpowicz L, et al. Disclosure, con-
    sent, and the exercise of patient autonomy in surgical innova-
    tion: a systematic content analysis of the conceptual literature.
    Account Res. 2014;21(6):331–52.
20. Healey P, Samanta J. When does the ‘learning curve’ of innova-
    tive interventions become questionable practice? Eur J Vasc
    Endovasc Surg. 2008;36:253–7.
                      Part IV
   Working Towards Surgical
Quality, Outcomes, and Safety
Chapter 28
Team Training
John T. Paige




Introduction
   “Do what you can, with what you have, where you are.”
   – Theodore Roosevelt

   Roosevelt’s words highlight the importance of functional
teamwork in modern healthcare. Teams are the foundational
component for the effective delivery of safe, quality patient
care. This fact is especially true in the contemporary, dynamic
clinical setting in which the sheer volume of annually intro-
duced new knowledge and technology makes it impossible
for an individual provider to care solely for a patient. Instead,
distributed expertise across a team is necessary in which the
members seamlessly coordinate and smoothly communicate
with one another to achieve the common goal of optimizing
patient outcomes. To Theodore Roosevelt, clinicians can do
what they can to help a patient through optimization of the
function of the teams on which they participate in the health-
care setting.


J. T. Paige (*)
Department of Surgery, MedicineLouisiana State University (LSU)
Health New Orleans School of Medicine, New Orleans, LA, USA
e-mail: jpaige@lsuhsc.edu

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature   537
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_28
538   J. T. Paige

   Given the importance of teams in providing care to the
patient, team development is a high priority within the
healthcare industry in general and organizations and their
institutions in particular. Team science provides many such
interventions to improve team function [1]. Their successful
application in healthcare would do much to address the many
deficiencies in teamwork that currently exist. Key to achiev-
ing this goal is a knowledge of team dynamics as well as a
familiarity of the useful strategies for optimizing them.
   This chapter’s goal is to aid in developing high-functioning
teams in healthcare. It will accomplish this task in the follow-
ing three ways: (1) reviewing the present status of teamwork
in healthcare, (2) applying team science to develop effective
healthcare teams, and (3) employing a framework for the suc-
cessful implementation of team development initiatives.


Present Status of Teamwork in Healthcare
One of the best examples of the importance of team interac-
tion in healthcare is Schmutz et al.’s meta-analysis of 1390
teams in acute care settings that demonstrated a positive,
medium-sized effect between teamwork and clinical perfor-
mance [2]. Their work showed that high team performance
was 2.8 times more likely to occur in teams who used team
processes. The fact that team training in healthcare improves
care processes and outcomes in addition to team processes
and behaviors is further proof of the power of teamwork in
providing safe, quality care [3].
   Teamwork is a crucial component in the delivery of effec-
tive healthcare. For more than a decade, however, investiga-
tors have demonstrated that it has been less than ideal.
Moreover, deficiencies are not isolated to one specific compe-
tency or aspect of teamwork, but, instead, encompass ele-
ments across the entire spectrum of knowledge, skills, and
abilities (KSAs) associated with it. Most salient is the cultural
milieu in which the members of the healthcare team conduct
their work. Early on, researchers recognized the pervasive silo
                              Chapter 28. Team Training        539

mentality, best illustrated in the operating room (OR), that
resulted in multi-professional interaction in lieu of true inter-
professional collaboration [4, 5]. This attitude arises in part out
of the episodic, specialty-­centered structure of care [6]. In
addition, it develops due to the cloistered nature of the educa-
tional and training processes for each profession [7]. Finally, it
evolves from the differing value systems within each profes-
sion [5, 8] that leads to socialization favoring early and rigid
differentiation between and hierarchical ordering among the
different professions [9].
   Not surprisingly, the healthcare work culture also pro-
motes a professional tribalism fostering an “us” versus
“them” mindset that facilitates blame shifting to other profes-
sions (i.e., “them”) [10]. As a result, separate professions
might harbor values and attitudes, use communication tech-
niques, learn, and have expectations related to the progres-
sion of care that are diametrically opposed to one another [7,
8]. This situation reduces team cohesion, leading to tension
and conflict [11]. Interestingly, the cultural context of the
work environment, not the innate character of the individual
team members themselves, seems to contribute to this tribal-
ism [12]. Such a toxic clinical setting becomes self-­perpetuating
through the adoption of negative attitudes and behaviors by
students who rotate through it as part of their educational
experience, the so-called “hidden curriculum” [13].
   The silo mentality and tribalism of the healthcare cultural
environment negatively influence team processes and
performance on multiple levels. Ineffective communication
within the OR team is a prominent example. In the 2000s,
research demonstrated that approximately one-third of com-
munications within the OR failed in their intentions [14].
Almost a decade later, such communication failures persisted
[15, 16]. Even today, OR team members might not know one
another’s name [17]. They may not communicate a clear
understanding of the steps of a procedure to one another [18,
19]. Closed-loop communication may be lacking [20]. Trauma
team communication is an additional example. Like the OR,
closed-loop communication is also limited between the team
540   J. T. Paige

members [21]. Furthermore, communication is often via so-­
called “mixed mode” methods in which a team member infers
a task via a question; these mixed mode methods are ineffec-
tive in promoting team function [22].
   Communication within healthcare teams is fraught with
difficulties, including failure to translate requests into action,
use of ineffective methods of communication, and an inability
to convey basic pieces of information such as names and pro-
cedure steps. Similar deficiencies exist related to the lack of
role clarity within healthcare teams [23], differing perceptions
of interprofessional collaboration [24–27] and communica-
tion [28], and disparate hierarchical views [18, 29], and mental
models [30]. These issues related to teamwork have negative
consequences related to various professions’ view of the
safety culture [31, 32], discouraging individuals from speaking
up regarding safety issues [33, 34]. In addition, they lead to
disruptions, incivility, and bullying that undermine individual
and team clinical performance and impede workflow [35, 36].
These altered team processes negatively impact clinical pro-
cesses and outcomes [37–39].
   Almost two decades ago, therefore, researchers knew that
teamwork in healthcare had significant deficiencies and gaps
that required interventions to improve them. Unfortunately,
these issues have persisted to present day. Fortunately, a cen-
tury’s worth of team science research can lead to a better
understanding of how teams work and the evidence-based
interventions that can help them improve performance.


 eam Science and Developing Healthcare
T
Teams
Since its origins defining the Hawthorne effect [40], team sci-
ence has grown into a field encompassing a wide variety of
specialties ranging from social to applied psychology. This
field has made major contributions to defining and delineat-
ing the intricacies of teams, teamwork, and team performance
and ways to improve their function. One of its key founda-
                              Chapter 28. Team Training       541

tional principles is that a team is more than the sum of its
individual constituent members [41]. The expression “a team
of experts does not necessarily make an expert team” encap-
sulates this concept in conveying the fact that even a group of
experts can fail if they cannot coordinate and communicate
well in order to cooperate [41]. Thus, a useful framework in
which to view a team is as a complex adaptive system (CAS).
Within a CAS, interrelations within the system interact with
influences outside the system in an iterative, nonlinear, inter-
dependent manner to create evolving and emerging out-
comes that are more than a cause-and-effect relationship [42].
At the team level, these interrelations arise from the fact that
individual team members act autonomously according to
their own internal motivations and rules of behaviors. An
action on one member’s part, however small, therefore, can
have an outsized impact on team function. Additionally, as
the team reacts to its past actions and environmental condi-
tions, unpredictable and new team behaviors can arise. In this
manner, the output of a team is greater than the cumulative
sum of what its individual members could produce [43].
   A further layer of complexity, seen in healthcare, is the fact
that a team does not typically operate in a vacuum, but,
instead, it interacts in an interdependent manner with other
teams within an organization. Within such a multi-team sys-
tem, each individual team has its own interactions and goals.
These specialized goals are part of the “superordinate” goals
of the system itself that require coordination, communication,
and cooperation among the teams for their achievement [44].
The interaction of the multiple teams caring for a trauma
victim is a good example of such a multi-team system. First,
the emergency medical services (EMS) team must go to the
scene, then assess, stabilize, and transport the patient to the
emergency department, communicating and coordinating
with the trauma resuscitation team there. Next, the trauma
team must evaluate and resuscitate the patient, communicat-
ing and coordinating with the OR team for transfer to surgery
or the critical care team for transfer to the intensive care unit.
Finally, the OR and critical care teams must communicate
542   J. T. Paige

and coordinate between each other for trips to the OR to
care for the patient. Although each team may have a special-
ized goal, the overarching system goal is to provide safe, qual-
ity care to the trauma patient.
    A useful definition of a team is as a group of two or more
individuals working interdependently with defined roles to
achieve a common goal [45]. In healthcare, teams vary consid-
erably according to their skill differentiation, temporal stabil-
ity, and authority differentiation, depending on their
composition [46]. For example, a trauma resuscitation team
that forms consisting of emergency physicians, trauma sur-
geons, emergency nurses, and respiratory therapists during a
shift to treat a critically injured patient brought into the
emergency department is a team having a high degree of skill
differentiation and authority differentiation but temporal
instability. Conversely, all the members of a team of oncolo-
gists working together to treat a cancer patient with chemo-
therapy have the same set of skills and equal hierarchical
positions, making this team one with low skill differentiation
and authority differentiation but temporal stability.
    In order to achieve a team’s common goal, team mem-
bers perform both taskwork and teamwork. Taskwork con-
sists of those processes that an individual performs that are
independent of other team members’ activities. Teamwork,
on the other hand, are those processes of an individual that
are interdependent with other team members’ actions,
requiring coordination among those individuals involved
[47]. As such, teamwork consists of an interrelated set of
team-level attitudinal (e.g., team cohesion and trust),
behavioral (e.g., coordination, communication), and cogni-
tive states (e.g., team learning, shared mental model) (the
so-called ABCs of teamwork), which combine to influence
team performance [48]. A team’s effectiveness, therefore, is
dependent on the quality of its teamwork.
    The input-process-output (IPO) model of team effective-
ness is a popular framework in which to conceptualize team-
work and its components ([49], Fig. 28.1). This model posits
that inputs to the team influence team processes, thereby
                             Chapter 28. Team Training      543




Figure 28.1 IPO model of team effectiveness

affecting team outcomes. Inputs can arise from the setting or
context in which the team operates (e.g., the work environ-
ment, information available to the team), from the team
characteristics themselves (e.g., the team composition, the
difficulty of the assignment), or from the individuals who
constitute the team (e.g., personality traits, KSAs). Team pro-
cesses are those ABCs of teamwork that allow the team to
coordinate, communicate, and cooperate. Finally, outputs
consist of the team outcomes flowing from the processes they
enact. In healthcare, these outputs fall into individual, team,
and organizational categories [46]. Team member satisfac-
tion, health, well-being, engagement, commitment, and per-
formance are individual-level outcomes. At the team level,
outcomes include the quality of healthcare the team provides
and patient satisfaction. Organizational-level outcomes con-
sist of overall patient satisfaction and quality of care as well
as resource use, staff turnover and absenteeism, financial
performance, and patient mortality and morbidity.
    The IPO framework further subdivides teamwork into
three additional processes: (1) transition, (2) action, and (3)
interpersonal ([49], Fig. 28.2). The team’s episodes of perfor-
mance temporally situate these phases with transition
­processes occurring between episodes, action processes span-
 ning the episodes, and interpersonal processes taking place
 both between and during episodes. Each process, in turn, has
544   J. T. Paige




Figure 28.2 The input-process-output (IPO) model and team devel-
opment interventions


discrete phases that can occur within it [50]. Mission analysis,
goal specification, and strategy formation and planning com-
prise the transition process components. Monitoring progress
toward goals, systems monitoring, team monitoring and
backup behavior, and coordination make up the action pro-
cess constituents. Finally, conflict management, motivating
and confidence building, and affect management are the
interpersonal process elements.
   All three processes and their more narrowly defined com-
ponents positively correlate with team performance and
team member satisfaction. Once more, they also have a posi-
tive, strong relationship with team cohesion (i.e., team mem-
bers’ attraction and commitment to their team, team members,
and team task) and team potency (i.e., the shared belief that
the team can be effective). Finally, the correlation between
these processes and team performance is stronger with
increasing team size and greater task interdependence [50].
   In addition to elucidating the dynamics of team interaction
via the IPO model, team science has also identified which
team processes help teams to achieve superior outcomes.
Several frameworks exist delineating the critical process
components that promote high team performance. One of
                            Chapter 28. Team Training     545

these frameworks is healthcare-based. The Team Strategies &
Tools to Enhance Performance and Patient Safety™
(TeamSTEPPS™) promotes team structure through a focus
on leadership, communication, situation monitoring, and
mutual support [51]. This program’s framework arose from
the Big Five Model of Teamwork that defined five key team-­
based competencies, team leadership, team orientation,
backup behavior, mutual performance monitoring, and adapt-
ability, moderated by three coordinating mechanisms, shared
mental models, closed-loop communication, and mutual trust
[52]. Finally, the 7C’s framework posits five components:
cooperation, coordination, communication, cognition, and
coaching, with two influencing factors, competence and con-
ditions [53].
    Evidence-based team development interventions (TDIs),
targeting one or more components of the IPO framework,
can aid in teaching teams these recognized team processes
that lead to superior team performance ([45], Fig. 28.2). TDIs
targeting team inputs include team task analysis, which iden-
tifies key behaviors for success, and team composition, which
selects team members based on their individual attributes.
Team composition can influence team performance by shap-
ing the ABCs of teamwork via team attributes, team opera-
tionalizations, the context in which the team is acting, and
temporal considerations [48]. Thus, team composition can
influence the emergence of particular team moods based on
individual personality traits. Teams with members who value
teamwork cooperate more and have greater confidence.
Conscientious team members led to teams that self-regulate
teamwork. Members who are sociable help teams perform
the ABCs better and promote reciprocity among members.
Finally, teams with high cognitive abilities tend to work well
together. On the downside, team composition can create fault
lines in which the creation of intra-team coalitions causes
conflict and impedes performance [48]. The two final input-­
oriented TDIs are team-based work design, which attempts
to structure roles and tasks within the broader team, and
546    J. T. Paige

team charter, a process of clarifying team direction through
the creation of a charter of team activity [45].
    Team monitoring and assessment performance and team
debriefing are process- and output-targeted TDIs,
respectively [45]. The former attempts to assess the team’s
progress to its goal(s). The latter involves self-reflection and
team reflexivity to identify gaps in performance and develop
process improvements to advance outcomes. Team debriefing
is a powerful method of TDI, since it engages team members
in active experiential learning, makes them more open to new
ideas and insights, and builds a team’s shared mental model
[1]. Its utility is illustrated by the fact that team debriefs alone
increase team performance by an average of 20–25% [54].
    Team training, team building, team coaching, and team
leadership are four TDIs that can target inputs, processes, or
outputs within the IPO framework [45]. Team training and
team building target team-level processes with team training
that teaches team-based competencies and team building
that focuses on interpersonal interactions [1]. Team training
improves specific KSAs related to high team performance.
Knowledge-based competencies include situational aware-
ness, transactive memory systems, and shared mental models.
Skill-based competencies encompass coordination, commu-
nication, conflict resolution, shared leadership, and backup
behavior. Attitude-based competencies involve team cohe-
sion, commitment to teamwork, psychological safety, mutual
trust, and collective efficacy. Team training as a TDI has
demonstrated moderate, positive effects between interven-
tions and team KSAs, processes, performances, and outcomes
[47, 55]. Team building focuses on improving the dynamics of
the team through goal setting, interpersonal-relationship
management, role clarification, and problem solving [1].
    Team leadership is the one of the few TDIs that focuses its
activities at the individual team member level [1]. Such
­training can be as powerful as team debriefing, improving
 learning, transfer, and organizational outcomes by as much as
 29% [56]. Additional benefits include that it improves out-
 comes related to the leader’s subordinates (e.g., satisfaction
                             Chapter 28. Team Training      547

levels, turnover) and it increases leadership capabilities,
thereby improving team performance. Key to success of lead-
ership training is using evidence-based recommendations in
curricula development. In particular, quality training content,
learner motivation, and organizational support are essential
for transfer of learning [1]. Finally, team coaching is a TDI
used to enhance behavior changes arising out of other TDIs
through interaction with the team to help its members coor-
dinate tasks and resources in order to achieve its goal(s) [45].
   TDIs have value in healthcare. As stated earlier, teams that
use team processes in healthcare are 2.8 times more likely to
have high team performance [2]. Two of the most popular
TDIs used in healthcare currently are team debriefing and
team training [57]. Team debriefing leads to improved out-
comes [58]. It accomplishes this improvement through active
learning of the team members and the creation of a shared
understanding of team priorities, strengths, and weaknesses
[1]. Such team-level reflection of goals, processes, and strate-
gies with adaptation to team function is the hallmark of team
reflexivity, a characteristic especially useful in situations
involving complex tasks and uncertainty of outcomes [59].
   Team training is the most popular TDI currently used in
healthcare. It leads to better clinical processes and outcomes
by improving team processes and performance [3].
Additionally, it causes reductions in medical errors as well as
improvements in safety climate [60]. Among team training
modalities, simulation-based training (SBT) and the use of
structured curricula focusing on team-based competencies,
such as TeamSTEPPS™, are common approaches. Advantages
of SBT that make it particularly attractive as a team training
modality are several. First, it provides a team the opportunity
to practice team-based KSAs in a safe learning environment
without harm to a patient [61]. Second, it gives teams the abil-
ity to practice treating low-frequency, high-risk events in
order to hone team response and efficiency of therapy [62].
When combined with curricula such as TeamSTEPPS™, SBT
results in enhanced skill acquisition, decreased adverse out-
comes, and retention of learning [63].
548   J. T. Paige

    In addition to SBT, team training can occur via didactic
lectures, tabletop exercises, web-based teaching, video-based
activities, and role-play [64, 65]. Regardless of the approach
taken, the training must rest on sound educational principles
related to curriculum development, delivery, and evaluation.
Adherence to an established curriculum development frame-
work when putting such training together ensures optimal
effectiveness. Kern’s approach is popular in medical educa-
tion. It involves employing the following six steps: (1) prob-
lem identification and general needs assessment, (2) targeted
needs assessment, (3) creation of goals and objectives, (4)
selection of educational strategies, (5) implementation of cur-
riculum, and (6) curriculum evaluation and feedback [66].
Another framework uses the acronym ADDIE to delineate
its key components: analysis, design, development, implemen-
tation, and evaluation [67].
    Effective delivery of a curriculum also relies on using rec-
ognized methods. For example, in SBT, the scenario used has
an important impact on the experiential learning. One useful
methodology for its development is the event-based approach
to training (EBAT) [68] that has had success in creating sce-
narios for trauma team training [69]. In addition, SBT
requires skilled facilitators for after-action debriefing. They
must foster a safe learning environment, guide learners
through their emotional response to the scenario, assist in
identifying gaps in performance and finding solutions to
them, and encourage participants to commit to change in
behavior. In short, their duties include making it safe, making
it stick, and making it last [70].
    Finally, curricula and training programs must undergo
comprehensive evaluation in order to determine how well
they work and to discover areas for improvement. Like cur-
riculum development, curricula and program evaluation
should follow an accepted, systematic approach to gauge its
effectiveness. Kirkpatrick’s framework for evaluating training
effectiveness is a well-known one that assesses a program on
four levels of potential change. The first level gauges partici-
pants’ reaction to the training. The second level assesses the
                              Chapter 28. Team Training      549

degree of learning of the participants resulting from the train-
ing. The third level measures the extent of participant behav-
ioral change in the workplace arising from the training, and
the fourth level evaluates the organizational impact in terms
of outcomes due to the training [71]. Team training in health-
care demonstrates a clear progression from learning to
behavior change to improvement in outcomes [60].
   Like all TDIs, their utility is only as effective as the mea-
surements used to assess their effectiveness. Thus, any team-
work or team performance instrument must be accurate and
reliable and show validity for use in the population assessed.
Due to the complexity of interaction among the affective
states, behaviors, and cognitive components of teamwork,
such tools require multiple items to address the multidimen-
sional aspects of teamwork in order to assess it adequately
[72]. In healthcare, this need has produced over 80 different
rater-based assessments of teamwork and nontechnical skills,
that combination of interpersonal and cognitive abilities [73].
Nearly all these instruments assess communication, team-
work, and leadership constructs, and up to 80% of them
evaluate task management and situation awareness. All have
undergone a degree of content validity and about two-­thirds
have compared the tool to various learner characteristics,
such as expertise. Only about 15% have evidence of conver-
gent validity. Eighty percent of these tools have measured
inter-rater reliability. Only a little over half have evidence of
internal consistency, and only about 15% have evaluated test-
retest reliability [73]. A lack of comprehensive psychomotor
evaluation also exists among the self-report surveys used to
gauge participants’ views of team interactions [74]. With these
types of instruments, items related to team cohesion and per-
ceived team effectiveness are common.
550   J. T. Paige

Successfully Implementing Team
 Development Interventions
Applying team science to enhancing teamwork in healthcare
is insufficient without employing an implementation strategy
that will foster its success. The field of implementation sci-
ence has developed in order to ensure the systematic uptake
of evidence-based research into clinical practice in healthcare.
Its application can quintuple the effectiveness of an interven-
tion and decrease the time it takes to implement it by one-
sixth [75]. The World Health Organization delineates several
critical components to implementation. These include having
adequate resources, proper training and education, oversight
and measurement of progress, effective communication strat-
egies, and collaboration through cultural change [76].
    Cultural change is quite challenging in any situation. It
involves multiple steps that help change the prevailing atti-
tudes and assumptions of an organization over time. John
Kotter’s eight-step model is promoted by TeamSTEPPS™
[51]. It begins with creating a sense of urgency for change.
Next, it involves bringing together a guiding coalition of like-­
minded individuals who then help with the subsequent steps
of developing a vision and strategy for change that they then
communicate to others in the organization. The subsequent
step empowers other individuals in the organization for
broad-based action. These steps then allow the generation of
short-term wins that are celebrated. Gains consolidate to
encourage more change, and then, finally, the new approaches
anchor themselves into the culture [77].
    For team training in healthcare, Friscella et al. have recog-
nized five key components to ensure its successful implemen-
tation [78]. First, a careful needs assessment helps determine
the targeted gaps that one addresses. Second, the team train-
ing must occur in a safe, noncritical learning environment.
Third, the training program’s design must maximize availabil-
ity, learning, and usability. Fourth, the training program must
undergo an evaluation of its effectiveness. Finally, a means to
sustain the learned team behaviors must develop [78].
                             Chapter 28. Team Training     551




Figure 28.3 The 5P approach to implementation of simulation-
based team training

   An illustrative example of the successful implementation
of a team training program is the NetworkZ SBT program to
enhance communication and teamwork in the operating
room across all of New Zealand [79]. The researchers used
the Organizing for Quality framework in identifying and
addressing challenges to adoption of the program. Through
this process, they learned several key lessons. National back-
ing of the program and local ownership of it were two such
learning points. Multilevel support and the necessity of pre-
senting evidence for training were another set of insights. The
recognition of the difficulty of cultural change and the impact
of quality on fostering acceptance of the program were also
important lessons. Finally, ongoing communication was nec-
essary to maintain support [79].
   Another example is the successful creation of a point of
care SBT program for OR team training [80]. In this situation,
the researchers utilized a “5P” approach to guide them in
recognizing and tackling barriers to implementation
(Fig. 28.3) [81]. This framework divides such challenges into
five broad categories of decreasing order of importance: (1)
finding a patron, (2) developing a plan, (3) locating a place,
(4) assembling your people, and (5) choosing your products.
552   J. T. Paige

Each category has tactical and strategic components that
require consideration.


Conclusion
Teams remain the foundational unit in healthcare, and their
effective function leads to safe, quality patient care. Current
teamwork, however, continues to be less than ideal in clinical
settings. Team science can help enhance team dynamics
through proven TDIs that, when combined with sound educa-
tional and implementation science principles, can foster
highly reliable team behavior to improve patient processes
and outcomes.


References
1. Lacerenza CN, Marlow SL, Tannenbaum SI, Salas E. Team devel-
   opment interventions: evidence-based approaches for improving
   teamwork. Am Psychol. 2018;73(4):517–31.
2. Schmutz JB, Meier LL, Manser T. How effective is teamwork
   really? The relationship between teamwork and performance
   in healthcare teams: a systematic review and meta-­    analysis.
   BMJ Open. 2019;9(9):e028280. https://doi.org/10.1136/
   bmjopen-­2018-­028280.
3. Weaver SJ, Dy SM, Rosen MA. Team training in health-
   care: a narrative synthesis of the literature. BMJ Qual Saf.
   2014;23(5):359–72.
4. Bleakley A. You are who I say you are: the rhetorical con-
   struction of identity in the operating theatre. J Work Learn.
   2006a;18(7):414–25.
5. Bleakley A, Boyden J, Hobbs A, Walsh L, Allard J. Improving
   teamwork climate in operating theatres: the shift from mul-
   tiprofessionalism to interprofessionalism. J Interprof Care.
   2006b;20(5):461–70.
6. Pepler EF, Pridie J, Brown S. Predicting and testing a silo-free
   delivery system. Healthc Manage Forum. 2018;31(5):200–5.
                               Chapter 28. Team Training         553

 7. Weller J, Boyd M, Cumin D. Teams, tribes and patient safety:
    overcoming barriers to effective teamwork in healthcare.
    Postgrad Med J. 2014;90(1061):149–54.
 8. Hall P. Interprofessional teamwork: professional cultures as bar-
    riers. J Interprof Care. 2005;19(Suppl 1):188–96.
 9. Price S, Doucet S, Hall LM. The historical social positioning
    of nursing and medicine: implications for career choice, early
    socialization and interprofessional collaboration. J Interprof
    Care. 2014;28(2):103–9.
10. Mannix R, Nagler J. Tribalism in medicine-us vs them. JAMA
    Pediatr. 2017;171(9):831.
11. Gillespie BM, Chaboyer W, Wallis M, Fenwick C. Why isn’t ‘time
    out’ being implemented? An exploratory study. Qual Saf Health
    Care. 2010;19(2):103–6.
12. Braithwaite J, Clay-Williams R, Vecellio E, Marks D, Hooper T,
    Westbrook M, Blakely B, Ludlow K. The basis of clinical tribal-
    ism, hierarchy and stereotyping: a laboratory-controlled team-
    work experiment. BMJ Open. 2016;6(7):e012467-2016-012467.
13. Doja A, Bould MD, Clarkin C, Eady K, Sutherland S, Writer
    H. The hidden and informal curriculum across the continuum
    of training: a cross-sectional qualitative study. Med Teach.
    2016;38(4):410–8.
14. Lingard L, Espin S, Whyte S, Regehr G, Baker GR, Reznick R,
    Bohnen J, Orser B, Doran D, Grober E. Communication failures
    in the operating room: an observational classification of recur-
    rent types and effects. Qual Saf Health Care. 2004;13(5):330–4.
15. Halverson AL, Casey JT, Andersson J, Anderson K, Park C,
    Rademaker AW, Moorman D. Communication failure in the
    operating room. Surgery. 2011;149(3):305–10.
16. Sevdalis N, Wong HW, Arora S, Nagpal K, Healey A, Hanna
    GB, Vincent CA. Quantitative analysis of intraoperative com-
    munication in open and laparoscopic surgery. Surg Endosc.
    2012;26(10):2931–8.
17. Bodor R, Nguyen BJ, Broder K. We are going to name names
    and call you out! Improving the team in the academic operating
    room environment. Ann Plast Surg. 2017;78(5 Suppl 4):S222–4.
18. Etherington N, Wu M, Cheng-Boivin O, Larrigan S, Boet
    S. Interprofessional communication in the operating room: a nar-
    rative review to advance research and practice. [Communication
    interprofessionnelle en salle d’operation: un compte rendu
    narratif pour faire avancer la recherche et la pratique]. Can J
    Anaesth. 2019;66(10):1251–60.
554    J. T. Paige

19. Kenawy D, Schwartz D. An evaluation of perioperative
    communication in the operating room. J Perioper Pract.
    2018;28(10):267–72.
20. Davis WA, Jones S, Crowell-Kuhnberg AM, O’Keeffe D, Boyle
    KM, Klainer SB, Smink DS, Yule S. Operative team commu-
    nication during simulated emergencies: too busy to respond?
    Surgery. 2017;161(5):1348–56.
21. El-Shafy IA, Delgado J, Akerman M, Bullaro F, Christopherson
    NAM, Prince JM. Closed-loop communication improves task
    completion in pediatric trauma resuscitation. J Surg Educ.
    2018;75(1):58–64.
22. Jung HS, Warner-Hillard C, Thompson R, Haines K, Moungey
    B, LeGare A, Shaffer DW, Pugh C, Agarwal S, Sullivan S. Why
    saying what you mean matters: an analysis of trauma team com-
    munication. Am J Surg. 2018;215(2):250–4.
23. Lingard L, Reznick R, DeVito I, Espin S. Forming professional
    identities on the health care team: discursive constructions of the
    ‘other’ in the operating room. Med Educ. 2002;36(8):728–34.
24. Carney BT, West P, Neily J, Mills PD, Bagian JP. Differences in
    nurse and surgeon perceptions of teamwork: implications for use
    of a briefing checklist in the OR. AORN J. 2010;91(6):722–9.
25. Collette AE, Wann K, Nevin ML, Rique K, Tarrant G, Hickey
    LA, Stichler JF, Toole BM, Thomason T. An exploration of nurse-­
    physician perceptions of collaborative behaviour. J Interprof
    Care. 2017;31(4):470–8.
26. House S, Havens D. Nurses’ and physicians’ perceptions of
    nurse-physician collaboration: a systematic review. J Nurs Adm.
    2017;47(3):165–71.
27. Makary MA, Sexton JB, Freischlag JA, Holzmueller CG, Millman
    EA, Rowen L, Pronovost PJ. Operating room teamwork among
    physicians and nurses: teamwork in the eye of the beholder. J
    Am Coll Surg. 2006;202(5):746–52.
28. Cruz SA, Idowu O, Ho A, Lee MJ, Shi LL. Differing perceptions
    of preoperative communication among surgical team members.
    Am J Surg. 2019;217(1):1–6.
29. Undre S, Sevdalis N, Healey AN, Darzi S, Vincent CA. Teamwork
    in the operating theatre: cohesion or confusion? J Eval Clin
    Pract. 2006;12(2):182–9.
30. Nakarada-Kordic I, Weller JM, Webster CS, Cumin D, Frampton
    C, Boyd M, Merry AF. Assessing the similarity of mental
    models of operating room team members and implications for
                                 Chapter 28. Team Training       555

      patient safety: a prospective, replicated study. BMC Med Educ.
      2016;16(1):229. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12909-­0 16-­0752-­8.
31.   Alzahrani N, Jones R, Rizwan A, Abdel-Latif ME. Safety atti-
      tudes in hospital emergency departments: a systematic review.
      Int J Health Care Qual Assur. 2019;32(7):1042–54.
32.   Pimentel MPT, Choi S, Fiumara K, Kachalia A, Urman RD. Safety
      culture in the operating room: variability among perioperative
      healthcare workers. J Patient Saf. 2017;17(6):412–6. Jun 1 Epub
      ahead of print.
33.   Etchegaray JM, Ottosen MJ, Dancsak T, Thomas EJ. Barriers
      to speaking up about patient safety concerns. J Patient Saf.
      2020;16(4):e230–4.
34.   Martinez W, Etchegaray JM, Thomas EJ, Hickson GB, Lehmann
      LS, Schleyer AM, Best JA, Shelburne JT, May NB, Bell SK.
      ‘Speaking up’ about patient safety concerns and unprofessional
      behaviour among residents: validation of two scales. BMJ Qual
      Saf. 2015;24(11):671–80.
35.   Villafranca A, Fast I, Jacobsohn E. Disruptive behavior in the
      operating room: prevalence, consequences, prevention, and man-
      agement. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 2018;31(3):366–74.
36.   Villafranca A, Hamlin C, Enns S, Jacobsohn E. Disruptive
      behavior in the operating room: a contemporary review. Can J
      Anesthe. 2017;64(2):128–40.
37.   Gjeraa K, Spanager L, Konge L, Petersen RH, Ostergaard
      D. Non-technical skills in minimally invasive surgery teams: a
      systematic review. Surg Endosc. 2016;30(12):5185–99.
38.   Kurmann A, Keller S, Tschan-Semmer F, Seelandt J, Semmer
      NK, Candinas D, Beldi G. Impact of team familiarity in
      the operating room on surgical complications. World J Surg.
      2014;38(12):3047–52.
39.   Pucher PH, Aggarwal R, Batrick N, Jenkins M, Darzi
      A. Nontechnical skills performance and care processes
      in the management of the acute trauma patient. Surgery.
      2014;155(5):902–9.
40.   Macefield R. Usability studies and the Hawthorne effect. J
      Usability Stud. 2007;2(3):145–54.
41.   Salas E, Reyes DL, McDaniel SH. The science of team-
      work: Progress, reflections, and the road ahead. Am Psychol.
      2018;73(4):593–600.
42.   The Health Foundation. Evidence scan: complex adaptive sys-
      tems. London; 2010. Retrieved from https://www.health.org.uk/
      sites/default/files/ComplexAdaptiveSystems.pdf.
556    J. T. Paige

43. Pype P, Mertens F, Helewaut F, Krystallidou D. Healthcare teams
    as complex adaptive systems: understanding team behaviour
    through team members’ perception of interpersonal interaction.
    BMC Health Serv Res. 2018;18(1):570. https://doi.org/10.1186/
    s12913-­0 18-­3392-­3.
44. Shuffler ML, Carter DR. Teamwork situated in multiteam sys-
    tems: key lessons learned and future opportunities. Am Psychol.
    2018;73(4):390–406.
45. Shuffler ML, Diazgranados D, Maynard MT, Salas E. Developing,
    sustaining, and maximizing team effectiveness: an integrative,
    dynamic perspective of team development interventions. Acad
    Manag Ann. 2018;12(2):688–724.
46. Lyubovnikova J, West MA. Why teamwork matters: enabling
    health care team effectiveness for the delivery of high-quality
    patient care. In: Salas E, Tannenbaum S, Cohen D, Latham G,
    editors. Developing and enhancing teamwork in organizations:
    evidence-based best practices and guidelines. San Francisco:
    Jossey-Bass; 2013. p. 313–47.
47. Salas E, Cooke NJ, Rosen MA. On teams, teamwork, and
    team performance: discoveries and developments. Hum Factors.
    2008;50(3):540–7.
48. Bell ST, Brown SG, Colaneri A, Outland N. Team composition
    and the ABCs of teamwork. Am Psychol. 2018;73(4):349–62.
49. Driskell JE, Salas E, Driskell T. Foundations of teamwork and
    collaboration. Am Psychol. 2018;73(4):334–48.
50. LePine JA, Piccolo RF, Jackson CL, Mathieu JE, Saul JR. A
    meta-analysis of teamwork processes: tests of a multidimen-
    sional model and relationships with team effectiveness criteria.
    Pers Psychol. 2008;61(2):273–307.
51. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. About
    TeamSTEPPS™; 2019, June. Retrieved from https://www.ahrq.
    gov/teamstepps/about-­teamstepps/index.html.
52. Salas E, Sims DE, Burke CS. Is there a big five in teamwork?
    Small Group Res. 2005;36:555–99.
53. Salas E, Shuffler ML, Thayer AL, Bedwell WL, Lazzara
    EH. Understanding and improving teamwork in organizations:
    a scientifically based practical guide. Hum Resour Manag.
    2015;54(4):599–622.
54. Tannenbaum SI, Cerasoli CP. Do team and individual debriefs
    enhance performance? A meta-analysis. Hum Factors.
    2013;55(1):231–45.
                                 Chapter 28. Team Training         557

55. McEwan D, Ruissen GR, Eys MA, Zumbo BD, Beauchamp
    MR. The effectiveness of teamwork training on teamwork behav-
    iors and team performance: a systematic review and meta-­analysis
    of controlled interventions. PLoS One. 2017;12(1):e0169604.
56. Lacerenza CN, Reyes DL, Marlow SL, Joseph DL, Salas
    E. Leadership training design, delivery, and implementation: a
    meta-analysis. J Appl Psychol. 2017;102(12):1686–718.
57. Buljac-Samardzic M, Doekhie KD, van Wijngaarden
    JDH. Interventions to improve team effectiveness within health
    care: a systematic review of the past decade. Hum Resour
    Health. 2020;18(1):2. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12960-­0 19-­0411-­3.
58. Couper K, Salman B, Soar J, Finn J, Perkins GD. Debriefing to
    improve outcomes from critical illness: a systematic review and
    meta-analysis. Intensive Care Med. 2013;39(9):1513–23.
59. Schmutz JB, Eppich WJ. Promoting learning and patient care
    through shared reflection: a conceptual framework for team
    reflexivity in health care. Academic medicine. J Assoc Am Med
    Coll. 2017;92(11):1555–63.
60. Hughes AM, Gregory ME, Joseph DL, Sonesh SC, Marlow SL,
    Lacerenza CN, Benishek LE, King HB, Salas E. Saving lives:
    a meta-analysis of team training in healthcare. J Appl Psychol.
    2016;101(9):1266–304.
61. Paige JT, Garbee DD, Brown KM, Rojas JD. Using simulation in
    interprofessional education. Surg Clin N Am. 2015;95(4):751–66.
62. Beaubien JM, Baker DP. The use of simulation for training
    teamwork skills in health care: how low can you go? Qual Saf
    Health Care. 2004;13(Suppl 1):i51–6.
63. Fung L, Boet S, Bould MD, Qosa H, Perrier L, Tricco A, Tavares
    W, Reeves S. Impact of crisis resource management simulation-­
    based training for interprofessional and interdisciplinary teams:
    a systematic review. J Interprof Care. 2015;29(5):433–44.
64. Hull L, Sevdalis N. Advances in the teaching and assessing of
    nontechnical skills. Surg Clin N Am. 2015;95(4):869–84.
65. Dedy NJ, Zevin B, Bonrath EM, Grantcharov TP. Current con-
    cepts of team training in surgical residency: a survey of north
    American program directors. J Surg Educ. 2013;70(5):578–84.
66. Kern DE. Overview: a six-step approach to curriculum devel-
    opment. In: Thomas PA, Kern DE, Hughes MT, Chen BY, edi-
    tors. Curriculum development for medical education: a six-step
    approach. 3rd ed. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press;
    2016. p. 5–9.
558    J. T. Paige

67. Chauvin SW. Applying educational theory to simulation-­
    based training and assessment in surgery. Surg Clin N Am.
    2015;95(4):695–715.
68. Rosen MA, Salas E, Wu TS, Silvestri S, Lazzara EH, Lyons R,
    Weaver SJ, King HB. Promoting teamwork: an event-based
    approach to simulation-based teamwork training for emergency
    medicine residents. Acad Emerg Med. 2008;15:1190–8.
69. Nguyen N, Elliott JO, Watson WD, Dominguez E. Simulation
    improves nontechnical skills performance of residents during
    the perioperative and intraoperative phases of surgery. J Surg
    Educ. 2015;75(5):957–63.
70. Paige JT. Making it stick: keys to effective feedback and debrief-
    ing in surgical education. In: Stefanidis D, Kordorffer Jr JR,
    Sweet R, editors. Simulation for surgery and surgical subspecial-
    ties. New York: Springer; 2019. p. 131–41.
71. Kirkpatrick DL. Evaluating training programs: the four levels.
    San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler; 1994. p. 229.
72. Widaman KF. Objective measurement of subjective phenomena
    in (OBSSR), editor, OBSSR online resource for behavioral
    and social sciences research. In: OBSSR e-Source online, edi-
    tor. Office of behavioral and social sciences research; 2020.
    Retrieved from http://www.esourceresearch.org/eSourceBook/
    ObjectiveMeasurementofSubjectivePhenomena/11AuthorBiogr
    aphy/tabid/722/Default.aspx.
73. Higham H, Greig PR, Rutherford J, Vincent L, Young D, Vincent
    C. Observer-based tools for non-technical skills assessment in
    simulated and real clinical environments in healthcare: a system-
    atic review. BMJ Qual Saf. 2019;28(8):672–86.
74. Kash BA, Cheon O, Halzick NM, Miller TR. Measuring team
    effectiveness in the health care setting: an inventory of survey
    tools. Heal Serv Insight. 2018;11:1–18.
75. Hull L, Athanasiou T, Russ S. Implementation science: a
    neglected opportunity to accelerate improvements in the safety
    and quality of surgical care. Ann Surg. 2017;265(6):1104–12.
76. Weiser TG, Forrester JA, Negussie T. Implementation science
    and innovation in global surgery. Br J Surg. 2019;106:e20–3.
77. Kotter J, Rathgeber H, Johnson S. Our iceberg is melting: chang-
    ing and succeeding under any conditions. New York: Portfolio;
    2005.
78. Friscella K, Mauksch L, Bodenheimer T, Salas E. Improving
    care teams’ functioning: recommendations from team science. Jt
    Comm J Qual Patient Saf. 2016;43(7):361–8.
                                Chapter 28. Team Training          559

79. Jowsey T, Beaver P, Long J, Civil I, Gardner AL, Henderson K,
    Merry A, Skilton C, Torri J, Weller J. Towards a safer culture:
    implementing multidisciplinary simulation-based team training
    in New Zealand operating theatres – a framework analysis. BMJ
    Open. 2019;9(10):e027122.
80. Paige JT, Kozmenko V, Yang T, Paragi Gururaja R, Hilton CW,
    Cohn I Jr, Chauvin SW. High-fidelity, simulation-based, inter-
    disciplinary operating room team training at the point of care.
    Surgery. 2009;145(2):138–46.
81. Paige JT. Team training at the point of care. In: Tsuda S, Scott
    DJ, Jones DB, editors. Textbook of simulation, surgical skills, and
    team training. Woodbury: Ciné-Med, Inc.; 2012.



Further Reading
Villamane M, Larranaga M, Alvarez A. Rating monitoring as a
   means to mitigate rater effects and controversial evaluations.
   Paper presented at the proceedings of 5th international confer-
   ence on technological ecosystems for enhancing multiculturality,
   Cadiz, Spain. 7 p. 2017. https://doi.org/10.1145/3144826.3145389
Paige JT, Sonesh SC, Garbee DD, Bonanno LS, editors.
   Comprehensive healthcare simulation: interprofessional team
   training and simulation. Springer Nature Switzerland AG; 2020.
Nestel D, Dalrymple K, Paige JT, Aggarwal R, editors. Advancing
   Surgical Education: Theory, Evidence, and Practice. Springer
   Nature Singapore Pte Ltd; 2019.
Chapter 29
Simulation and OR Team
Performance
Jaisa Olasky and Daniel B. Jones



Unsafe surgery results from a combination of technical and
nontechnical errors. These errors, when unrecognized or
when combined with latent system failures, can lead to sig-
nificant injury to the patient and even death. The recogni-
tion that human error is inevitable in complex tasks has
been slow to reach the medical community. In early writ-
ings on the topic [1, 2], Leape describes the scope of the
problem of medical errors and the difficulty of the culture
of medicine in addressing these problems. Twenty percent
of all hospitalized patients suffer an iatrogenic illness and
69% of medical errors are preventable. In the Harvard
Medical School Institutions, for example, 44% of claims in
the perioperative period are for technical reasons. The
remainder of claims is from nontechnical reasons such as
wrong-site surgery, retained objects, abnormal blood loss,


J. Olasky
Mount Auburn Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, USA
D. B. Jones (*)
Department of Surgery, Rutgers New Jersey Medical School,
Newark, NJ, USA
e-mail: djones1@bidmc.harvard.edu

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature   561
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_29
562   J. Olasky and D. B. Jones

and hematoma, which may have had technical components
to the error but were all associated with communication
breakdown. In the analysis of these closed claims, the
Harvard-affiliated insurance company, CRICO, recognized
some common features of these communication gaps: they
were verbal; there was status asymmetry; there was ambigu-
ity as to responsibility; and there were multiple handoffs
and transfers. To remedy these communication errors,
CRICO proposed several solutions: a surgical safety check-
list, closed-loop communication, and assertiveness in com-
munication (i.e., speaking up). The following chapter will
address the use of simulation and OR team training as a
possible vehicle to train operation room teams, with the
final goal being to reduce surgical error and improve the
safety of surgical inpatients.
    Adverse events occur when errors happen at an inop-
portune moment. Far more common than adverse events
are near misses or slips – those examples of risky behavior
that do not result in injury. If one million adverse events
occur each year in the USA, it is estimated that the num-
ber of near misses would be five million. Therefore, any
training of medical personnel should include careful review
of performance to identify such risky behavior. In an
observational study of operating room safety, Christian
et al. [3] reviewed 63 h of surgery and had over 4500 obser-
vations. They observed a number of critical system failures
that had impact on patient safety. All of these critical
events involved either communication and information
flow or workload and competing tasks. This group recog-
nized at least one close call during each surgical procedure.
All members of the OR team also had periods of decreased
activity. A strategy to recognize times of task overload and
share the workload was suggested. Thus, multidisciplinary
teams that are performing complex tasks can be observed
and assessed for specific parameters of patient safety and
team performance.
      Chapter 29.   Simulation and OR Team Performance    563

Simulation
The advantage that simulation has over a performance
review of actual surgeries is that comparison of time-adverse
events can be generated with great frequency and the resul-
tant discussion and intervention can be documented and
reviewed in a timely fashion. The scenarios can be con-
structed from actual events that have occurred, can be taken
from closed-claim archives, or can even be constructed to
predict future operations. The tasks performed by the operat-
ing team can be reasonably realistic. For example, surgeons
can sew anastomoses, control bleeding, and practice wound
closures. Anesthesia personnel can intubate, transfuse, draw
laboratory samples, and administer medications. Nurses can
assemble and arrange equipment, facilitate communication,
and count remaining sponges and needles. The tasks are both
familiar and validated. While some “suspension of disbelief”
is required, most operating room teams report substantial
face validity and can adapt to the simulation environment to
perform the operative plan and to participate in their usual
role on the team. The Imperial College in London published
their seminal experience with procedures in a simulated
operating theater with a standardized OR team in 2005. Their
group observed OR crisis and used a checklist and global
assessment to record technical skills and communication dur-
ing femoral arterial hemorrhage. All team members partici-
pated in a debriefing session after the scenario and rated the
face validity of the simulated environment. Darzi et al. [4]
sought a high degree of realism in order to better understand
team interactions and performance (Figs. 29.1 and 29.2). The
Carl J. Shapiro Simulation and Skills Center at Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center expanded this concept and built a
mock minimally invasive surgery endosuite for team
simulation. Multiple camera mountings and directional
­
microphones record all communication and activity. Models
of intraabdominal organs that bleed were created and placed
564   J. Olasky and D. B. Jones




Figure 29.1 Carl J Shapiro simulation and skills center mock
endosuite




Figure 29.2 Control room for mock endosuite
      Chapter 29.   Simulation and OR Team Performance     565

behind a one-way mirror, while staff may control the
­simulation, including bleeding and vital signs, and they can
 signal confederates [5].
    Powers et al. demonstrated face and construct validity of
 the mock operating endosuite with laparoscopic crisis sce-
 narios [6]. Performances of Fundamentals of Laparoscopic
 Surgery (FLS)-certified and non-FLS-certified surgeons were
 placed in a laparoscopic crisis scenario and recorded the time
 to diagnose intraoperative bleeding following Veress needle
 entry, time to inform the operating team for the need to con-
 vert to an open procedure, and the actual time to conversion.
 Technical and nontechnical skills were assessed (Table 29.1).
 This scenario was recreated at the SAGES 2007 Annual
 Meeting Learning Center. The American College of Surgeons
 recognized the value of simulation with the release of the
 American College of Surgeons/Association of Program
 Directors in Surgery National Skills Curriculum (Table 29.2).


Team Training
Team training is an organizational approach that attempts to
identify and practice the essential aspects of teamwork and
communication in certain endeavors that by their nature
show high activity, potential for disaster, or high stress.
Therefore, much of the early team training efforts have
focused on military operations, aviation, and the nuclear
power industry. Effective teams adapt a “shared mental
model” and work to balance the effort, anticipate problems,
seek relevant data, resolve conflicts, and communicate effec-
tively. In addition, such team training can identify stressors
such as fatigue, work overload, and crises that can test any
team. Most team training performance reviews include a
comprehensive debriefing. Several validated assessment tools
have been developed to help with the debriefing and maxi-
mize the value of these activities.
566    J. Olasky and D. B. Jones

Table 29.1 Nontechnical skills
Category              Question
Communication and     Instructions to assistant/scrub nurse; clear
interaction           and polite
                      Awaits acknowledgment from the
                      assistant/scrub nurse
                      Assistance sought from team members
Vigilance/situation     Monitored patient’s parameters
awareness               throughout procedures
                        Awareness of anesthetist
                        Actively initiates communication with
                        anesthetist during crisis periods
Team skills             Maintains a positive rapport with the
                        whole team
                        Open to opinions from other team
                        members
                        Acknowledges the contribution made by
                        other team members
                        Supportive of other team members
Leadership and          Adherence to best practice during the
management skills       procedure, e.g., does not permit corner
                        cutting by self or team
                        Time management, e.g., appropriate time
                        allocation without being too slow or
                        rushing team members
                        Resource utilization, i.e., appropriate
                        task-load distribution and delegation of
                        responsibilities
                        Authority/assertiveness
Decision-making         Prompt identification of the problem
crisis
                        Informed team members; promptly,
                        clearly, and to all team members
      Chapter 29.     Simulation and OR Team Performance         567

Table 29.1 (continued)
Category                 Question
                         Outlines strategy/institutes a plan, i.e.,
                         asks scrub nurse for suction, instruments,
                         suture materials
                         Anticipates potential problems and
                         prepares a contingency plan, e.g., asks to
                         order blood, calls for help
                         Option generation; takes the help of the
                         team (seeks team opinion)


Table 29.2 ACS-APDS simulation modules
Teamwork in the trauma bay
Postoperative pneumonia (hypoxia, septic shock)
Postoperative hypotension
Laparoscopic crisis
The preoperative briefing
Laparoscopic troubleshooting
Postoperative pulmonary embolus
Postoperative myocardial infarction (cardiogenic shock)
Latex allergy anaphylaxis
Abdominal compartment syndrome (hypotension)
Patient handoff
Retained sponge on postoperative chest radiograph


   A number of assessment tools have been developed to
measure the performance of operating teams in a simulated
OR environment. Most of these tools utilize the taxonomy of
crisis management principles and have a graded assessment
of each item in the taxonomy. Assessment of leadership, del-
egation, workload distribution, data collection, avoidance of
568   J. Olasky and D. B. Jones

fixation, utilization of resources, and recognition of limita-
tions are included in most assessment tools. All of these tools
suffer from time constraints during the scenario, the use of
clipped phrases during crises, undeclared thoughts or con-
cerns, and the performance anxieties of being in the spot-
lighted, videotaped, artificial environment of a simulation.
   In addition to trained rater evaluations of team training
performance, there have also been descriptions of self-­
assessments that use a Likert-type scale rating to evaluate
the effectiveness of team training exercises using simulated
operating room scenarios. One report [7] cited significant
improvements in role clarity, anticipation, cross monitoring,
and team cohesion/interaction. Thus, self-assessment tools
exist to demonstrate a perceived improvement in the cogni-
tion and interpersonal skills required for successful team
training.
   The use of simulation to teach effective team training has
been demonstrated in a number of medical disciplines. All of
these disciplines have a high acuity environment and require
the use and interpretation of complex and technical monitors
and instruments. One example is a program that simulates
high-risk pediatric trauma events. Pediatric trauma teams are
complex, often including many members such as pediatric
surgeons, emergency medicine physicians, nurses, paramedics,
respiratory therapists, residents, and critical care fellows. The
team training exercise using simulation was able to demon-
strate an improvement over time of the performances of the
pediatric trauma team, who appropriately completed tasks
65% of the time before the program and 75% of the time
1 year after the program [8].
   Another example is from a multicenter study [9] involving
emergency medicine clinicians, in which high-fidelity simula-
tion was used to construct a team training course that
improved clinical performance, increased patient safety, and
decreased liability. The emergency room team was asked to
care for two patients who presented with significant acuity
and hemodynamic instability (anaphylaxis and splenic rup-
ture). The tasks were appropriate and time critical (vital sign
      Chapter 29.   Simulation and OR Team Performance       569

assessment, abdominal ultrasound), and the treatments were
monitored not only for timeliness and efficiency but also for
appropriate safety checks (identification of patient, labeling
of tubes, checking blood). In an area of medicine where the
cost of teamwork failure is high, such team training was
shown to improve outcomes and reduce liability.
   The use of simulation is also becoming routine in prepar-
ing the OR team for robotic surgery cases. These “dress
rehearsals” allow the team to simulate high-risk scenarios,
such as an emergency conversion to open for sudden major
bleeding, which requires excellent team communication in
order to rapidly undock the robot. In addition to case-specific
team training, best practice guidelines for new robotics pro-
grams published by Dr. Estes et al. in 2017 [10] recommended
that trainees experience a minimum of 8 h of hands-on train-
ing, including inanimate models.
   At Harvard Medical School, a malpractice insurer [The
Risk Management Foundation of the Harvard Medical
Institutions (“CRICO/RMF”)] developed a unique program
with leaders from the medical school, as part of a Harvard
Surgical Safety Collaborative. In this program, surgical edu-
cation leaders at each of the four major teaching hospitals
helped design and coordinate ten patient safety team training
scenarios using simulation, and organized a systematic evalu-
ation of this program. Each team contained at least one
attending surgeon, one attending anesthesiologist, and one
operating room nurse. The participants had a debriefing at
the end and 99% filled out a survey about their experience.
Participants found the scenarios realistic, challenging, and
relevant. The research group concluded that a standardized,
realistic, multicenter full operative team training program is
feasible and would have a significant impact on patient safety
in the future. While the initial ratings were very high, Hung
et al. [11] preformed a follow-up survey 1 year after the initial
study period ended. The respondents who had experienced
an adverse event in the interim, such as lost sponge/miscount
or a bleeding crisis, reported higher satisfaction with the pre-
vious training. Overall, 67% of respondents reported that
570   J. Olasky and D. B. Jones

they still believed the simulation would improve patient care,
but only 37% were receptive to more team training them-
selves. There are several limitations to team training that may
account for this lower-than-expected rate of participants who
would like to participate in more training in the future.


Limitations of Simulation for Training
Despite many studies showing the benefits of simulation,
there are some limitations to universal adoption. Studies have
shown that simulation centers are used more often if they are
in close proximity to the intended user; however, not all
medical institutions have space available near clinical centers.
Surveys of trainees also show that a lack of mandatory pro-
tected simulation time limits their ability to participate in
these programs. Ideally, all clinical sites with trainees will
have simulation time built into the curriculum for learners.
CME and hospital safety programs will be more successful if
there is compensation available for the participants’ time. In
addition, centers that use simulation for team training do not
always use validated assessment or debriefing tools, which
potentially limits the benefit of the team training session.
Therefore, OR team training safety programs should be orga-
nized by or with consultation from a simulation expert.


Future Directions
Some of the limitations of in-person OR team training simu-
lations can be overcome with the use of a mock OR set in
virtual reality (VR). De et al. [12] have developed and tested
an immersive VR OR fire simulator (Fig. 29.3). Initial studies
evaluated one provider (surgeon, anesthesiologist, surgical
technician, or nurse) as they safely respond to an OR fire.
Participants reported it felt real and provoked anxiety.
Researchers are now funded by NIH to expand the simula-
tion to include four participants at a time. This new version of
      Chapter 29.   Simulation and OR Team Performance      571




Figure 29.3 Virtual reality mock OR simulator

the immersive VR model will enable OR team training of
high-risk scenarios to occur at any day or location that is con-
venient to the user.
572    J. Olasky and D. B. Jones

Summary
Cognitive and interpersonal skills that are central to team
training exercises include situational awareness, anticipation,
and flexibility. The interpersonal skills focus on planning,
advice, and feedback. In each category of skills, there are sug-
gested behavioral markers that indicate both good and poor
performance. The SAGES Masters Program [13] is a curricu-
lum for the deliberate lifelong learning of surgery after resi-
dency. The current pathways include hernia, foregut, robotic,
colorectal, bariatric, biliary, and endoscopy. In the future, a
leadership development pathway will be made available to
learners. OR team training using simulation and/or virtual
reality would complement this curriculum perfectly.
   In conclusion, OR team training using simulation has been
shown to improve these skills of teamwork and communica-
tion that are so often deficient in episodes of patient injury.
The simulated operation room provides a safe environment
not only for the patient but also for the practitioner. The sur-
geon can rehearse necessary technical skills as well as pre-
pare for rare but known complications. The current level of
simulation has adequate face validity and provides sufficient
challenges to engage the fully trained surgeon. Team training
reinforces a set of cognitive and interpersonal skills that are
essential to competent crisis management. Surgeons, surgical
training programs, and professional societies should embrace
the use of high-fidelity simulation to teach OR team training
to its trainees, as a periodic refresher course to its graduates,
and for continued medical education and leadership
programs.


Selected References
 1. Leape LL. Error in medicine. JAMA. 1994;272(23):1851–7.
 2. Leape LL. Reporting of adverse events. NEJM. 2002;3(20):1633–8.
 3. Christian CK, Gustafson ML, Roth EM, Sheridan TB, Gandhi
    TK, Dwyer KD, et al. A prospective study of patient safety in the
    operating room. Surgery. 2006;139:159–73.
       Chapter 29.   Simulation and OR Team Performance           573

 4. Moorthy K, Munz Y, Adams S, Pandey V, Darzi A. A human fac-
    tors analysis of technical and team skills among surgical trainees
    during procedural simulations in a simulated operating theatre.
    Ann Surg. 2005;242:631–9.
 5. Arriaga AF, Gawande AA, Raemer DB, Jones DB, Smink
    DS, Weinstock P, Dwyer K, Lipsitz SR, Peyre S, Pawlowski
    JB, Muret-Wagstaff S, Gee D, Gordon JA, Cooper JA, Berry
    WR. Pilot testing of a model for insurance-driven, large scale
    multicenter simulation training for operating room teams. Ann
    Surg. 2013;259(3):403–10. PMID:24263327.
 6. Powers KA, Rehrig ST, Irias N, Albano HA, Feinstein DM,
    Johansson AC, et al. Simulated laparoscopic operating room
    crisis: approach to enhance the surgical team performance. Surg
    Endosc. 2008;22(4):885–900.
 7. Paige JT, Kozmenko V, Yang T, Gururaja RP, Hilton CW,
    Cohn I Jr, et al. High-fidelity simulation-based interdisciplin-
    ary operating room team training at the point of care. Surgery.
    2009;145:138–46.
 8. Falcone RA, Daughterty M, Schweer L, Patterson M, Brown RL,
    Garcia VF. Multidisciplinary pediatric trauma team training using
    high-fidelity trauma simulation. J Pediatr Surg. 2008;43:1065–71.
 9. Small SD, Wuerz RC, Simon R, Shapiro N, Conn A, Setnik
    G. Demonstration of high fidelity simulation team training for
    emergency medicine. Acad Emerg Med. 1999;6(4):312–23.
10. Estes SJ, Goldenberg D, Winder JS, et al. Best practices for
    robotic surgery programs. JSLS. 2017;21(2):e2016.00102.
11. Hung T, Nuwar RM, Therrien S, Sullivan AM, Jones SB,
    Pawlowski J, Parra JM, Jones DB. OR team training using simu-
    lation: hope or hype? Am J Surg. 2020;222:1146–53. submitted.
    Oral at ASE 2020.
12. Truong H, Qi D, Ryason A, Cudmore J, Alfred S, Jones SB,
    Sullivan AM, Parra JM, De S, Jones DB. Does your team know
    how to respond safely to an operating room fire? Outcomes of a
    virtual reality, AI-enhanced simulation training. Ann Surg. 2020;
    Submitted. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T0tp-8sDSBE.
13. Jones DB, Stefandidis D, Korndorffer JR, Dimick JB, Schultz
    L, Scott DJ. SAGES University MASTERS Program: a struc-
    tured curriculum for deliberate, lifelong learning. Surg Endosc.
    2017;31(8):3061–71. 28634631.
14. Anderson M, Leflore J. Playing it safe: simulated team training
    in the OR. AORN J. 2008;87(4):772–9.
574    J. Olasky and D. B. Jones

15. Blum RH, Raemer DB, Carroll JS, Dufresne RL, Cooper JB. A
    method for measuring the effectiveness of simulation-based
    team training for improving communication skills. Anesth Analg.
    2005;100:1375–80.
16. Cooper JD, Clayman RV, Krummel TM, Schauer PR, Thompson
    C, Moreno JD. Inside the operating room – balancing the risks
    and benefits of new surgical procedures: a collection of perspec-
    tives and panel discussion. Cleve Clin J Med. 2008;75(6):S37–54.
17. Nestel D, van Herzeele I, Aggarwal R, O’Donoghue K, Choong
    A, Clough R, et al. Evaluating training for a simulated team in
    complex whole procedure simulations in the endovascular suite.
    Med Teach. 2009;31:e18–23.
18. Powers K, Rehrig S, Schwaitzberg SD, Callery MP, Jones
    DB. Seasoned surgeons assessed in a laparoscopic crisis. J
    Gastrointest Surg. 2009;13:994–1003.
19. Sundar E, Sundar S, Pawlowski J, Blum R, Feinstein D, Pratt
    S. Crew resource management and team training. Anesthesiol
    Clin. 2007;25:283–300.
20. Tsuda S, Scott D, Doyle J, Jones DB. Surgical skills training and
    simulation. Curr Probl Surg. 2009;46(4):261–372.
21. Tsuda S, Scott DJ, Jones DB, editors. ASE textbook of simula-
    tion: technical skills and team training. Woodbury: Cine-Med Inc;
    2010.
22. Yule S, Flin R, Paterson-Brown S, Maran N. Non-technical skill
    for surgeons in the operating room: a review of the literature.
    Surgery. 2006;139:140–9.
23. Shohan S, Zevin B, Grantcharov TP, Roberts KE, Duffy
    AJ. Perceptions, training experiences, and preferences of surgi-
    cal residents toward laparoscopic simulation training: a resident
    survey. J Surg Educ. 2014;71(5):727–33.
24. Robertson JM, Dias RD, Yule S, Smink DS. Operating room team
    training with simulation: a systematic review. J Laparoendosc
    Adv Surg Tech. 2017;27(5):475–80.
25. Qi D, Ryason A, Milef N, Alfred S, Abu-Nuwar R, Kappus M, De
    S, Jones DB. Virtual reality operating room with AI guidance:
    design and validation of fire scenario. Surg Endosc. 2021;(2):35,
    779–786. PMID: 32072293.
Chapter 30
Debriefing After Simulation
Brandon W. Smith and Neal E. Seymour




The term “debriefing” generally describes a process to elicit
information pertaining to an experienced event from the
event’s participants in order to gain a better understanding of
it. Systematic debriefing models are employed as educational
tools to enhance learning in numerous fields. This process of
learning may also provide therapeutic benefits which might
occur with debriefings after traumatic events [1]. In medical
education, debriefings are a critical component in both simu-
lation and clinical surgical training. The goals of debriefing in
these settings are ultimately to stimulate reflection on indi-
vidual and team performance in order to gain insights that
improve the quality of clinical practice. This is especially true
of debriefing after simulated patient care in healthcare team
contexts. All such simulation scenarios ought to be debriefed,
focusing on things that went well, things did not go well, and
opportunities for improvement.
    In order to appreciate the essential nature of debriefing in
medical education, it is helpful to consider it in the context of

B. W. Smith · N. E. Seymour (*)
Baystate Medical Center, Department of Surgery,
Springfield, MA, USA
e-mail: brandon.smithmd@baystatehealth.org;
neal.seymour@bhs.org


© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature   575
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_30
576    B. W. Smith and N. E. Seymour

basic human pedagogical models. Learning in simulation is
experiential in the same way it would be for real-world expe-
riences. Several taxonomies, most notably Kolb’s learning
cycle [2], describe cognitive consolidation of recent experi-
ences by a process of reflection (Fig. 30.1) in the timeframe
immediately following the experience. This process is a per-
sonal one and can involve cognitive and perceptual chal-
lenges that might color a participant’s reflective account of
the experience. Participants new to simulation or to the expe-
rience being simulated, who have little or no prior experience
with debriefings, may find this especially challenging. They
may require significant help and support to initiate the reflec-


                                Concrete
                               experience




       Active                                           Reflective
   experimentation                                     observation




                                Abstract
                            conceptualization


Figure 30.1 Kolb’s learning cycle is one way to view the process of
experiential learning such as might occur in a simulation training
environment. The reflection-conceptualization components describe
the principal opportunities offered during debriefing. Irrespective of
the pedagogical model by which learning might be thought to occur
during a session of simulated patient care, the importance of a high-­
quality debriefing cannot be overemphasized
                 Chapter 30. Debriefing After Simulation       577

tive process. The best post-simulation debriefing models call
for a skilled debriefer to help compensate for this. This per-
son does not behave as a traditional teacher in post-­simulation
debriefing. Rather, it is his or her responsibility to serve (a) as
a prompter when reflective process stalls or stops and (b) as
an objective contributor to help define the record of actual
events when it is appropriate to do so and (c) to guide the
process in an ongoing fashion toward achievement of the
stated educational goals. For these reasons, this role is more
commonly described as “facilitator,” given the nature of
responsibilities. There are numerous commentaries on these
basic requirements that provide a generally consistent view
of the facilitator’s role [3–7].
   In clinical medical education, the concept of the prototypi-
cal “teacher-learner” relationship is not conducive to efficient
performance improvement. Over time, the paradigm in medi-
cal education has shifted from “teaching” to “coaching.”
Teaching implies a unidirectional flow of information that is
not dependent on conversation or observation. Coaching is
more than just providing feedback to learners; it involves
providing practical suggestions for improvement with the aim
of enhancing learner performance at a specific activity.
Successful coaching involves identification of individualized
goals with performance-based feedback in light of these
goals. Feedback can be provided in a variety of forms, includ-
ing debriefing. For these reasons, the role of a facilitator is
better aligned with coaching than teaching [8].
   Many standard and situation-specific prompts are avail-
able to a facilitator; these may be particularly helpful for
novice facilitators with minimal experience. This can be dem-
onstrated by the EXPRESS trial, which demonstrated
improved learner outcomes with novice instructors using a
scripted debriefing tool compared to those educators who did
not use a script [9]. These prompts take the form of questions
(Table 30.1) that are open-ended and stimulate learner
engagement in reflective process. The process should not
become facilitator-centric, however, and must remain focused
on the participant(s) and develop an understanding of their
578    B. W. Smith and N. E. Seymour

Table 30.1 Example facilitator open-ended questions
1. How did you feel when you noticed that?
2. What were your other options at that point?
3. How did you think things went during….?
4. What do you think was right/not right about that decision?


role in the simulation event in order to be effective. Although
the term “structured” is often used to describe high-quality
debriefing methods, this does not suggest the need for rigidity
in either facilitator prompting or sequencing of questions.
One debriefing expert stated that “our belief in the impor-
tance of debriefing and in the utility of the structured variety
led us to the construction of various debriefing protocols. This
approach frequently resulted in undesirable rigidity on the
part of the facilitator and unmitigated boredom on the part
of the participants” [10]. An analysis of interviews with peer-­
nominated debriefing experts revealed that as facilitators
gained experience with debriefings, they tended to use
“blended debriefing” approaches, acknowledging that no
single debriefing model is a perfect fit for every scenario.
Additionally, expert facilitators emphasized the ability to
fluidly navigate the dynamic nature of these debriefing inter-
actions. Summarized as “thinking on your feet,” one expert
stated the need to be flexible enough to address learners’
needs rather than rigid learning objectives as one component
of a successful debriefing [7]. Structure in the form of general
strategies, goal-directed phases, and a systematic plan for
assessment [4] are all compatible with effective debriefing.
   In the final analysis, debriefing is a tool of fundamental
importance to stimulate reflection as an aid to experiential
learning. There are several options to ensure that learner
reflection occurs. Debriefings can take the form of discussion
among participants in the course of reviewing the simulation,
with the facilitator taking steps to direct discussion only if the
process stalls or deviates from an educationally valuable
direction. Alternatively, the facilitator can specifically direct
                Chapter 30. Debriefing After Simulation     579

individual participants to present aspects of their perfor-
mance, working toward an understanding of good (or bad)
performance. The degree of comfort and prior experience of
the learners can be a major determinant of the degree of
input made by the facilitator. Ideally, reflection would be
spontaneous and complete, and no facilitator would be
required. This is rarely the case with student or resident learn-
ers in medical simulation, although there are numerous
examples of self-debriefing and written debriefing models
that do not involve external facilitation. Irrespective of the
degree of direction provided, participants are given the
opportunity to critically analyze and to discuss their actions,
decisions, and emotional states.
   In addition to traditional debriefing at the end of a case
scenario, many debriefing experts utilize “reflection-in-­
action” or so-called reflective pauses. This form of debriefing
takes place in the midst of the simulated scenario and may be
initiated by the facilitator or the learner. The concept of
reflective pauses takes advantage of the continuous internal
monologue of the learner(s). As learners navigate scenarios,
they may be internally debriefing their own decision-making,
technical skills, or performance as a team leader. Reflective
pauses take advantage of this internal monologue as a spring-
board to further capture learner engagement, and offers
opportunity to address elements of learner performance that
otherwise may be missed at the formal end of scenario
debrief. Another advantage of the reflective pause is the abil-
ity of the facilitator to gain insight into the learner’s thought
process. This allows the facilitator to evaluate not only the
learner’s actions, but the reasoning yielding that action. One
can imagine a scenario during which the learner performs the
correct action, such as intubating the patient, but under the
pretense of an incorrect diagnosis. If the facilitator only
observes the outcome (the decision to intubate), they may
miss the learner’s knowledge gap. Missing these opportuni-
ties in simulation can lead learners to develop a false sense of
understanding. Another advantage of reflective pauses is to
celebrate and reinforce high performance during the scenario.
580   B. W. Smith and N. E. Seymour

This can build confidence appropriately in the learner and
thus augment learning [11].
    Rudolph et al. [12] used a phasic description of debriefing in
order to better define how it fits into a formative assessment
methodology (Table 30.2). Of particular interest is the “analy-
sis” phase, which provides the critical information for assess-
ment by defining the gap between actual and desired
performance during the simulation. This performance gap is
revealed through facilitated discussion of the simulation, which
is also the principal means to ensure a good reflective learning
experience. An opportunity to address knowledge gaps with
“brief didactics targeted to immediate learning needs” is also
defined. Although it is important not to allow this to preempt
other debriefing dialogue, overall learning objectives ought to
accommodate this type of information flow.
    Ensuring learner engagement during debriefing is argu-
ably the most difficult challenge facing the facilitator [5]. An
actively engaged participant has the best opportunity for a
solid learning experience and presumably the best opportu-
nity for retention and transfer of what is learned to clinical
care. The common facilitator pitfalls are all detriments to
effective learner engagement (Table 30.3). In addition to
facilitator “lecturing,” ineffective use of audiovisual (A-V)
recordings can be problematic. Systems to deliver recorded
video represent significant investments for simulation facili-
ties and are now widely available. A-V records of the simu-
lated event may be used as an aid to the debriefing process,
provided there are appropriate annotations to guide access to
relevant sites in oftentimes lengthy recordings. Excessive

Table 30.2 Phases of debriefing [12]
Reactions     Learner expresses initial emotional reactions to
phase         simulation
Analysis       Discussion process directed to close performance
phase          gap between actual and desired performance
Summary        Distill lessons learned into discrete concepts that
phase          can be used in practice
                   Chapter 30. Debriefing After Simulation     581

Table 30.3 Pitfalls of debriefing
1. Facilitator lecturing
2. Close-ended questions
3. Inadequate emotional safety (recriminations, accusations)
4. Interruptions to find relevant video segments


time spent scanning videos for segments that are worth
reviewing can be a significant distraction and break the flow
of the debriefing. If the video is not well annotated, it is prob-
ably more effective to use participant recall than to risk losing
participant engagement. When systematically studied, many
reports suggest that video-assisted and non-video-assisted
debriefing methods offer similar outcomes [13, 14].
   Most simulation training events occur in a training lab, a
simulation suite, or an actual clinical environment (in situ
simulation). There is no single successful formula for the site
of debriefing, and issues of convenience and feasibility often
help determine where the debriefing takes place. It is impor-
tant that the timing of debriefing be as soon after the
completion of the simulated scenario as possible to take
­
advantage of the learner’s experience while it is fresh in their
minds. The site should be quiet, distraction-free, and should
accommodate all participants in the simulation session in a
way that permits face-to-face discussion. Sometimes access to
the simulation environment can be helpful for focused reen-
actment, but most debriefings occur outside the simulation
suite in a classroom setting with access to A-V recordings of
the simulation event, which can be referred to as an aid in the
reflective process.
   Irrespective of the physical site in which debriefings occur,
the environment must be one that ensures emotional safety
for the learner [2, 5]. A variety of factors pertinent to the
learners, the simulation, and/or the facilitator may potentially
compromise this sense of safety and cause a debriefing situa-
tion to become emotionally charged to the detriment of
effective education [15]. The learner may be new to clinical
582   B. W. Smith and N. E. Seymour

care or to the specific problem being managed and may
become defensive, especially if they feel that their perfor-
mance might be viewed by others as inadequate. The learn-
er’s sense of vulnerability may be increased by the impression
of having been “deceived” by the manner in which a difficult
simulation problem was presented [16]. If other participants
are critical or even overbearing, this problem may be accen-
tuated. An unskilled facilitator may provoke the same
response by either being excessively critical or expounding
their knowledge of good performance at the cost of good
learner reflection. The facilitator essentially adjusts the level
of supportiveness that a learner encounters in the debriefing
environment.
   Improving the effectiveness of debriefing may require
careful observation of the process by experienced personnel
and then a second debriefing for the facilitator. The Center
for Medical Simulation developed the Debriefing Assessment
for Simulation in Healthcare (DASH©), a tool to assess the
effectiveness of debriefing using global ratings applicable to
any medical discipline [17]. This is an example of systematic
quality improvement in simulation, focusing on development
of the educator’s skills. Ultimately, experience through
repeated trials coupled with feedback from both learners and
expert debriefers is the best formula for improvement of
debriefing skills. The degree to which debriefing can be made
a positive learning experience may very well be the most
important single determinant of the success of a simulation
training effort. As educators improve their debriefing skill,
this may translate to successful coaching outside of the simu-
lation environment.
   In the final analysis, the goal of medical simulation is to
improve clinical performance with the hope that this results
in improved quality of patient care and improved patient
outcomes. Truly effective debriefing as an educational inter-
vention and adjunct to the effectiveness of simulation meth-
ods can make the difference between a high and a low impact
experience for simulation learners. There are no compelling
studies showing where this intervention falls in Kirkpatrick’s
                Chapter 30. Debriefing After Simulation       583

four-level model of training evaluation [18], but our goal as
surgical educators ought to ultimately be to improve clinical
outcomes (Kirkpatrick Level 4). Over the last two decades,
the value of simulation in improving surgical learner techni-
cal and nontechnical performance in clinical settings
(Kirkpatrick Level 3) has been well established [19–21] with
some tantalizing suggestion that there are outcomes benefits.
Mounting evidence suggests that if teaching faculty members
adopt coaching models and utilize more organized, struc-
tured approaches to educate in the perioperative setting,
trainees can be expected to perform better than they would
in response to traditional teaching [22–24]. One such model
offering a structured approach incorporating formalized
debriefings into intraoperative teaching is the “Briefing,
Intraoperative Teaching, Debriefing” (B-I-D) model pro-
posed by Roberts and colleagues [25]. The consolidation of
information acquired at each of the B-I-D experiential stages
culminates with the debriefing and offers the best opportu-
nity to close the learning loop and extract the maximum
benefit from the coaching model of teaching. This structured
model has recently been put before SAGES membership,
suggesting that it represents a “best practice” to maximize
opportunities for effective learning from experiences in the
operating room [26]. Building on this, we propose that
expanded adaptation of routine high-quality debriefings into
surgical simulation events of all types, in conjunction with
effective preparation and teaching, will produce superior
educational results. However, even considering it in isolation
from other important educational methods, the importance
of debriefing in simulation and medical education cannot be
overstated.


References
 1. Tuckey MR, Scott JE. Group critical incident stress debriefing
    with emergency services personnel: a randomized controlled
    trial. Anxiety Stress Coping. 2014;27(1):38–54.
584    B. W. Smith and N. E. Seymour

 2. Kolb D. Experiential learning: experience as the source of learn-
    ing and development. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall; 1984.
 3. Salas E, Klein C, King H, et al. Debriefing medical teams: 12
    evidence-based best practices and tips. Jt Comm J Qual Patient
    Saf. 2008;34(9):518–27.
 4. Lederman LC. Debriefing: toward a systematic assessment of
    theory and practice. Simul Gaming. 1992;23(2):145–60.
 5. Petranek C. A maturation in experiential learning: principles of
    simulation and gaming. Simul Gaming. 1994;25(4):513–22.
 6. Fanning RM, Gaba DM. The role of debriefing in simulation-­
    based learning. Simul Healthc. 2007;2(2):115–25.
 7. Krogh K, Bearman M, Nestel D. “Thinking on your feet”—a
    qualitative study of debriefing practice. Adv Simul. 2016;1:12.
 8. Landerville J, Cheung W, Frank J, Richardson D. A defini-
    tion for coaching in medical education. Can Med Educ J.
    2019;10(4):e109–10.
 9. Cheng A, Hunt EA, Donoghue A, Nelson-McMillan K, Nishisaki
    A, Leflore J, Eppich W, Moyer M, Brett-Fleegler M, Kleinman
    M, Anderson J, Adler M, Braga M, Kost S, Stryjewski G, Min S,
    Podraza J, Lopreiato J, Hamilton MF, Stone K, Reid J, Hopkins
    J, Manos J, Duff J, Richard M, Nadkarni VM, EXPRESS
    Investigators. Examining pediatric resuscitation education using
    simulation and scripted debriefing: a multicenter randomized
    trial. JAMA Pediatr. 2013;167(6):528–36.
10. Thiagarajan S, Thiagi Gameletter. Seriously fun activities for
    trainers, facilitators, performance consultants, and manag-
    ers; 2008. http://thiagi.net/archive/www/pfp/IE4H/august2008.
    html#ToolKit. Accessed 22 Dec 2020.
11. Clapper TC, Leighton K. Incorporating the reflective pause in
    simulation: a practical guide. J Contin Educ Nurs. 2020;51(1):32–8.
12. Rudolph JW, Simon R, Raemer DB, Eppich WJ. Debriefing as
    formative assessment: closing performance gaps in medical edu-
    cation. Acad Emerg Med. 2008;15(11):1010–6.
13. Cheng A, Eppich W, Grant V, Sherbino J, Zendejas B, Cook
    D. Debriefing for technology-enhanced simulation: a systematic
    review and meta-analysis. Med Educ. 2014;48(7):657–66.
14. Savoldelli GL, Naik VN, Park J, Joo HS, Chow R, Hamstra
    SJ. Value of debriefing during simulated crisis management:
    oral versus video-assisted oral feedback. Anesthesiology.
    2006;105(2):279–85.
15. Savoldelli GL, Naik VN, Hamstra SJ, Morgan PJ. Barriers
    to the use of simulation-based education. Can J Anesth.
    2005;52(9):944–50.
                 Chapter 30. Debriefing After Simulation         585

16. Stewart L. Ethical issues in postexperimental and postexperien-
    tial debriefing. Simul Gaming. 1992;23(2):196–211.
17. Simon R, Raemer DB, Rudolph JW. Debriefing assessment for
    simulation in healthcare (DASH)© Rater’s handbook. Boston:
    Center for Medical Simulation; 2010. https://harvardmedsim.
    org/wp-­content/uploads/2017/01/DASH.handbook.2010.Final.
    Rev.2.pdf.
18. Kirkpatrick D, Kirkpatrick J, editors. Evaluating training pro-
    grams. The four levels. 3rd ed. San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler;
    2006.
19. Capella J, Smith S, Philp A, Putnam T, Gilbert C, Fry W,
    Harvey E, Wright A, Henderson K, Baker D, Ranson S, Remine
    S. Teamwork training improves the clinical care of trauma
    patients. J Surg Educ. 2010;67(6):439–43.
20. Seymour NE, Gallagher AG, Roman SA, O’Brien MK, Bansal
    VK, Andersen DK, Satava RM. Virtual reality training improves
    operating room performance: results of a randomized, double-­
    blinded study. Ann Surg. 2002;236(4):458–63.
21. Zendejas B, Cook DA, Bingener J, Huebner M, Dunn WF, Sarr
    MG, Farley DR. Simulation-based mastery learning improves
    patient outcomes in laparoscopic inguinal hernia repair: a ran-
    domized controlled trial. Ann Surg. 2011;254(3):502–11.
22. Yule S, Henrickson Parker S, Wilkinson J, McKinley A,
    MacDonald J, Neill A, McAdam T. Coaching non-technical skills
    improves surgical residents’ performance in a simulated operat-
    ing room. J Surg Educ. 2015;72(6):1124–30.
23. Bonrath EM, Dedy NJ, Gordon LE, Grantcharov
    TP. Comprehensive surgical coaching enhances surgical skill in
    the operating room: a randomized controlled trial. Ann Surg.
    2015;262(2):205–12.
24. Gagnon LH, Abbasi N. Systematic review of randomized con-
    trolled trials on the role of coaching in surgery to improve
    learner outcomes. Am J Surg. 2018;216(1):140–6.
25. Roberts NK, Williams RG, Kim MJ, Dunnington GL. The brief-
    ing, intraoperative teaching, debriefing model for teaching in the
    operating room. J Am Coll Surg. 2009;208(2):299–303.
26. Gardner AK. The Briefing: Intra-Op Teaching-Debriefing (B-I-­
    D) Model [Podium Presentation]. SAGES Annual Meeting
    2017. Houston; 2017 Mar 2. https://www.sages.org/video/
    the-­briefing-­intra-­op-­teaching-­debriefing-­b-­i-­d-­model/.
Chapter 31
Using Simulation
for Disclosure of Bad
News
Limaris Barrios



Educating the medical community with regard to disclosure
of medical errors, unanticipated outcomes, and/or bad news
has become a priority for physician educators, and a popular
topic over the last two decades [1–6]. Unfortunately, physi-
cians and surgeons are not well equipped to deliver difficult
news due to inadequate training. It is not surprising that liti-
gation, humiliation, and stress burden those charged with this
responsibility [1, 3–6].
   Today, patients, accreditation standards, laws, and hospital
policies require explicit and candid communication after such
events are recognized [1–3, 6, 7]. Training of physicians in this
field has become critical. Seven states have passed laws that
mandate notification of patients after an adverse event –
Nevada, Florida, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Vermont, Oregon,
and California [1, 8], and the Joint Commission on
Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations (JCAHO) and
National Quality Forum (NQF) have created standards that

L. Barrios (*)
Dr. Kiran C. Patel College of Allopathic Medicine (NSU MD),
Nova Southeastern University in Florida,
Fort Lauderdale, FL, USA
e-mail: limaris.barrios@hcahealthcare.com

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature   587
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_31
588   L. Barrios

require disclosure [1, 7, 9–15]. Similarly, Australia and the UK
have launched pilot programs which promote full disclosure
after an adverse event has occurred [3].
   Moreover, aggressive disclosure policies developed by
healthcare organizations aim to improve patient satisfaction,
decrease litigation costs, and create safe practice protocols
[1]. The University of Michigan Health System Program, the
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Massachusetts, and the
Johns Hopkins Hospital in Maryland are among others who
have created disclosure policies with positive results thus far
[1–3, 5, 9, 10, 12–14, 16]. Since the implementation of these
programs, a number of claims and lawsuits have diminished,
and the annual litigation costs were noted to be decreased as
well.
   “Full apology laws” whereby admission to fault is inadmis-
sible in court have been passed in several states, including
Georgia, Colorado, Arizona, and South Carolina, to name a
few, and are under development in others [1, 4, 5, 13, 14, 17].
Thirty-nine states and the District of Columbia have “apol-
ogy laws” which prohibit certain statements, expressions, or
other evidence related to disclosure from being admissible in
a lawsuit [18]. More importantly, patients are demanding full
disclosure during adverse events. They want to understand
how the adverse event occurred and want to ensure that
future events will be prevented [1, 14].
   Medical students and resident physicians are also required
to prove competency in disclosure of adverse events. The
United States Medical Licensing Examination (USMLE),
sponsored by the Federation of State Medical Boards (FSMB)
and the National Board of Medical Examiners (NBME),
includes questions focused on full disclosure and public
reporting under the topics of medical ethics, jurisprudence,
and physician/patient relationship [19]. Medical students
need to pass the USMLE, and therefore correctly answer
questions regarding disclosure of adverse events, before
qualifying for a medical license to practice in the USA.
   The Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical
Education (ACGME) has taken similar steps, whereby physi-
Chapter 31.   Using Simulation for Disclosure of Bad News     589

cian residents need to prove competency in this area before
graduating from accredited residency programs in the
USA. Unfortunately, many residents do not get an opportu-
nity to lead or even witness such disclosures during their
training [1, 19–21]. Most surgeons have learned this difficult
task by observing their mentors, and have not had an oppor-
tunity to practice and improve this skill before using it in their
professional career. This limited training will likely result in
poor communication between the surgeon and patient,
patient dissatisfaction, and perhaps a greater number of mal-
practice claims and lawsuits [21].
   Simulation-based training is an integral and essential part
of surgical residency training in this era. No one will deny its
effectiveness in the acquisition of technical and nontechni-
cal skills [22–26]. Different scenarios are recreated to assess
and improve communication, team skills, and the ability to
react under stress, providing the opportunity to practice and
develop a variety of skills in a controlled, risk-free environ-
ment [22–26]. The simulated environment is the modern
tool whereby learners acquire the skills required for real
medical practice, decreasing potential injury to the patient
[23, 24]. Simulation-based training has been studied and
applied for the training of surgical residents in the disclo-
sure of bad news [1].
   One such study was conducted at Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center in Boston from June of 2007 to March of
2008 [1]. The study aimed to use simulation to evaluate dis-
closure of bad news among surgical residents who performed
a laparoscopic cholecystectomy on a virtual reality simulator
in a mock operating room. The surgical residents were ran-
domized into two different scenarios: one in which there was
bile duct injury during the procedure and the other included
incidental findings of metastatic gallbladder cancer. The resi-
dents were asked to deliver the bad news to a scripted family
member after the procedure. The disclosure encounters were
videotaped, and the residents were rated by independent
reviewers using a modified SPIKES protocol as an assess-
ment tool [27].
590   L. Barrios

    The study found that in general, trainees are ill-prepared
for conversations that involve disclosure of adverse or unex-
pected outcomes. Senior residents were more comfortable
with disclosure of bad news and obtained better ratings with
the modified SPIKES protocol, likely secondary to their
increased exposure to these difficult conversations. However,
a minority of residents had led or even observed disclosures
of iatrogenic injury or incidental operative findings during
any portion of their training [1]. This study illustrates how
simulation can be applied to the disclosure of bad news, and
incorporated into medical school, residency, or physician
training. Using a simulation-based module, the learner’s
responses during difficult conversations can be evaluated,
and feedback provided to improve future disclosure
encounters.
    The American College of Surgeons and the Association of
Program Directors in Surgery (ACS/APDS) have recognized
the importance of training in disclosure of bad news and have
incorporated simulation into a new training module. The sur-
gical skills curriculum for residents (Phase III), developed in
the summer of 2008, includes an Apology Module which
integrates simulation for the practice and acquisition of skills
required in disclosure of bad news [6]. In this module, the
surgical resident goes through a scenario where a sponge is
inadvertently left in the patient’s abdomen during surgery.
The resident is asked to disclose the bad news to the patient’s
husband, who is a confederate (trained actor). The disclosure
is videotaped and debriefed, mainly evaluating the quality of
the disclosure and the resident’s communication skills [6].
    One useful component to a successful simulation includes
video-recording the experience; this technique has been used
for years on many robust simulation scenarios to enhance
the learning experience [1, 27–29]. The use of checklists has
also been identified as another functional tool which
improves the learning experience [28]. A study performed
out of Vanderbilt University studied the use of a checklist to
help faculty assess ACGME Milestones for Anesthesiology
residents in an Objective Structured Clinical Examination
Chapter 31.   Using Simulation for Disclosure of Bad News   591

(OSCE). They concluded that the use of the checklist
assisted in correct assessments of the learners [28]. Other
key components to simulation in healthcare education
include feedback debriefing, deliberate practice, and curricu-
lum integration [30]. These components have been studied
extensively and identified as having a positive impact on the
learner’s experience [30].
   According to The Joint Commission Journal on Quality
and Patient Safety, eight factors are the most critical elements
necessary for successful simulation programs —science, staff,
supplies, space, support, systems, success, and sustainability
[31]. Science includes utilization of clinicians and training
designers, checklists, training location, publicly announcing
desired behaviors, and providing drills to offer trainees more
opportunities to practice [31]. For staff, the recommendation
is recruit champions to promote the use of simulation for
training [31]. Procuring supplies from surplus or expired
equipment available in other units [31] has been proposed.
Space is the location where the simulation will take place. It
is advisable to create support from leadership and staff for
the simulation project. Systems includes matching the fidelity
of the training system with desired training objectives,
encouraging sharing success stories. Finally, sustainability
includes accruing new simulation champions and instructors.
   On the other hand, it is important to discuss some of the
challenges and limitations of simulation training. Learner and
faculty time constraints can limit the availability of simula-
tion programs and dissemination. Additionally, resource
intensive requirements may not allow for generalization and
adoption across the board. As a result, simulation courses
may be performed infrequently. As such, it may be difficult to
achieve mastery due to lack of repetition. It has also been
pointed out that simulation training may require adjustments
to account for innovation along the learning pathway, in
order to stay current and not stagnant or obsolete. These
challenges may impede achievement of expertise in the sub-
ject at hand [32].
592    L. Barrios

   To summarize, policies, standards, and laws have been
implemented in the USA and abroad which require open
disclosure of adverse events and unanticipated outcomes to
patients. It is evident that both physicians in training and
practice are not prepared or adequately trained for these dif-
ficult conversations. Simulation provides the learner with a
venue to practice and perfect their skills, including the disclo-
sure of bad news.


Selected Reading
 1. Barrios L, Tsuda S, Derevianko A, et al. Framing family conver-
    sation after early diagnosis of iatrogenic injury and incidental
    findings. Surg Endosc. 2009;23:2535–42.
 2. Gallagher TH, Levinson W. Disclosing harmful medical errors
    to patients: a time for professional action. Arch Intern Med.
    2005;165(16):1819–24.
 3. Gallagher TH, Studdert D, Levinson W. Disclosing harmful
    medical errors to patients. N Engl J Med. 2007;356(26):2713–9.
 4. Kowalczyk L. Doctors say they need protection to apologize.
    Boston: The Boston Globe; 2007.
 5. Lazare A. Apology in medical practice: an emerging clinical skill.
    JAMA. 2006;296(11):1401–4.
 6. ACS/APDS Skills Curriculum for Residents: Phase 3, Module
    10-retained sponge on a postop chest X ray. http://elearning.facs.
    org/course/view.php?id=10&topic=12 (2008). Accessed 29 June
    2009.
 7. Joint Commission Resources. Hospital accreditation standards.
    Oakbrook Terrace: Joint Commission Resources; 2007.
 8. http://www.aon.com/risk_management/default.jsp. Accessed 21
    Jan 2008.
 9. Kraman SS, Hamm G. Risk management: extreme honesty may
    be the best policy. Ann Intern Med. 1999;131(12):963–7.
10. Gallagher TH, Waterman AD, Garbutt JM, et al. US and
    Canadian physicians’ attitudes and experiences regarding dis-
    closing errors to patients. Arch Intern Med. 2006;166(15):1605–11.
11. The Leapfrog Group: The National Quality Forum safe prac-
    tices leap. http://www.leapfroggroup.org/media/file/Leapfrog-­
    National_Quality_Forum_Safe_Practices_Leap.pdf (2007).
    Accessed 18 Jan 2008.
Chapter 31.    Using Simulation for Disclosure of Bad News        593

12. Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations.
    Health care at the crossroads: strategies for improving the medi-
    cal liability system and preventing patient injury. http://www.
    jointcommission.org/NR/rdonlyres/3F1B626C-­C B65-­4 68B-­
    A871-­488D1DA66B06/0/medical_liability_exec_summary.pdf
    (2005). Accessed 18 Jan 2008.
13. Clinton HR, Obama B. Making patient safety the centerpiece of
    medical liability reform. N Engl J Med. 2006;354(21):2205–8.
14. Wojcieszak D, Banja J, Houk C. The sorry works! Coalition:
    making the case for full disclosure. Jt Comm J Qual Patient Saf.
    2006;32(6):344–50.
15. National Quality Forum. National Quality Forum updates
    endorsement of serious reportable events in healthcare. http://
    www.qualityforum.org/pdf/news/prSeriousReportableEvents10-­
    15-­06.pdf (2006). Accessed 18 Jan 2008.
16. Lamb RM, Studdert DM, Bohmer RM, Berwick DM, Brennan
    TA. Hospital disclosure practices: results of a national survey.
    Health Aff (Millwood). 2003;22(2):73–83.
17. McMichael BJ. The failure of “sorry”: an empirical evaluation
    of apology laws, health care and medical malpractice. Lewis &
    Clark Law Review, Forthcoming 73 Pages Posted: 21 Aug 2017.
    Last revised: 4 Jun 2018. https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.
    cfm?abstract_id=3020352. Accessed 18 Nov 2020.
18. McMichael BJ, Van Horn RL, Viscusi K. ‘Sorry’ is never enough,
    how state apology laws fail to reduce medical malpractice liabil-
    ity risk. Stanford Law Rev. 2019;71(2):341–409.
19. United States Medical Licensing Examination. http://www.
    usmle.org. Accessed 29 Jun 2009.
20. Hutul OA, Carpenter RO, Tarpley JL, Lomis KD. Missed
    opportunities: a descriptive assessment of teaching and attitudes
    regarding communication skills in a surgical residency. Curr
    Surg. 2006;63(6):401.
21. Rider EA, Hinrichs MM, Lown BA. A model for communica-
    tion skills assessment across the undergraduate curriculum. Med
    Teach. 2006;28(5):e127–34.
22. Chang L, Petros J, Hess DT, Rotondi C, Babineau TJ. Integrating
    simulation into a surgical residency program: is voluntary partici-
    pation effective? Surg Endosc. 2007;21(3):418–21.
23. Dunkin B, Adrales GL, Apelgren K, Mellinger JD. Surgical simu-
    lation: a current review. Surg Endosc. 2007;21(3):357–66.
594    L. Barrios

24. Park J, MacRae H, Musselman LJ, et al. Randomized controlled
    trial of virtual reality simulator training: transfer to live patients.
    Am J Surg. 2007;194(2):205–11.
25. Passman MA, Fleser PS, Dattilo JB, Guzman RJ, Naslund
    TC. Should simulator-based endovascular training be inte-
    grated into general surgery residency programs? Am J Surg.
    2007;194(2):212–9.
26. Powers KA, Rehrig ST, Irias N, et al. Simulated laparoscopic
    operating room crisis: an approach to enhance the surgical team
    performance. Surg Endosc. 2007;22(4):885–900.
27. Baile WF, Buckman R, Lenzi R, Glober G, Beale EA, Kudelka
    AP. SPIKES-A six-step protocol for delivering bad news: appli-
    cation to the patient with cancer. Oncologist. 2000;5(4):302–11.
28. Easdown LJ, Wakefield ML, Shotwell MS, Sandison MR. A
    checklist to help faculty assess ACGME milestones in a video-­
    recorded OSCE. J Grad Med Educ. 2017;9(5):605–10.
29. Poirier TI, Pailden J, Jhala R, Ronald K, Wilhelm M, Fan
    J. Student self-assessment and faculty assessment of perfor-
    mance in an interprofessional error disclosure simulation train-
    ing program. Am J Pharm Educ. 2017;81(3):54.
30. Motola I, Devine LA, Chung HS, Sullivan JE, Issenberg
    SB. Simulation in healthcare education: a best evidence practi-
    cal guide. AMEE guide no. 82. Med Teach. 2013;35(10):e1511–30.
31. Lazzara EH, Benishek LE, Dietz AS, Salas E, Adriansen DJ. Eight
    critical factors in creating and implementing a successful simula-
    tion program. Jt Comm J Qual Patient Saf. 2014;40(1):21–9.
32. Using simulations for learning - advantages & disadvantages.
    https://www.designingdigitally.com/blog/2018/10/advantages-­
    and-­disadvantages-­using-­simulations-­learning. Accessed 18 Nov
    2020.
Chapter 32
Teleproctoring in Surgery
Julio Santiago Perez and Shawn Tsuda




Introduction
The Society of American Gastrointestinal and Endoscopic
Surgeons (SAGES) previously established guidelines for the
use of telecommunications technology for postgraduate sur-
gical training and practice [1, 2]. It is necessary to continue
developing and refining how telemedicine is incorporated in
surgery as technology and paradigms evolve. The goal of this
chapter is to establish a compendium of current knowledge
on telemedicine to encourage efficiency, safety, and collabo-
ration in promoting the best patient care possible.
   Telemedicine has been used in some form for enhancing
the health of patients and the quality of providers for over
50 years [3]. The medical-industrial complex has made prodi-
gious strides with the development of technologies in radiol-
ogy, minimally invasive surgery (MIS), emergency medicine,




J. S. Perez · S. Tsuda (*)
Valley Health System General Surgery Department,
Las Vegas, NV, USA
e-mail: drshawntsuda@vipsurg.com


© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature   595
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_32
596   J. S. Perez and S. Tsuda

general medicine, and medical informatics. Such technologies
have connected with advances in broadband communications
to make telemedicine, in some cases, a seamless component
of medical training and patient care [4–6]. Brought to the
forefront with the 2020 COVID-19 pandemic, the medical
community has been stimulated to expand and innovate ways
to provide high-quality care to address a shortage of physi-
cians, gaps in access, travel restrictions, and social-distancing
requirements [7, 8]. In this document, we will address dis-
course and evolving guidelines regarding the increasing rele-
vance of telemedicine in the current medical landscape,
obstacles and possible solutions, practical benefits, reliability,
learning curves, and recommendations for safe and effica-
cious telemedicine applications [9, 10].


Definitions
Previous guidelines by SAGES established definitions for
concepts related to telemedicine and education [1, 2]. With
evolving technology and concepts in telemedicine have come
changes to the basic framework of this field, as well as its
vernacular. The following are updated definitions related
specifically to surgical training that should reflect a common
language that is essential to instructors, learners, clinicians,
and researchers in the area of telemedicine.

Telecommunications Telecommunications is communication
over any distance using several means or modalities including,
but not limited to, electrical signals, optical signals, or
electromagnetic waves, over a number of mediums such as
wire, optical fiber, or radio waves as wireless transmissions.
“5G,” or fifth-generation broadband technology, currently
provides up to a gigabit per second of wireless transmission
with almost imperceptible latency. Key elements of
telecommunication are a transmitter, which takes information
and transfers it to a signal; a medium, which can be a physical
                    Chapter 32.   Teleproctoring in Surgery    597

or over-the-air channel by which the signal is transmitted; and
a receiver, which captures the signal and converts it to readable
and usable information for the recipient. Telecommunications
can also be synchronous, where the information is sent,
received, and processed in as close to real time as possible by
the transmitter, medium, and receiver, or asynchronous, where
the information is transmitted and processed later by the
receiver. For the purposes of telecommunication applications
to surgery, we will be assuming primarily synchronous
applications, and two-way communication which involves
both audio and video signals.

Central Site A course or clinical location where the core
activity is being performed will be referred to as the central
site and is the target of telecommunication input. This differs
from the remote site, which is the source of the
telecommunication input from the instructor, preceptor, or
proctor. The site may be a hospital, ward, operating room,
simulation center, classroom, or any other location where the
physician(s) or learner(s) are located and receiving input
from their instructors, preceptors, or proctors.

Remote Site The remote site is the source of telecommunication
input from the instructor, preceptor, or proctor. There is no
defined distance of the remote site to the central site, which
can range from a few feet such as between one robotic console
and another console in the same operating room, or across
continents. The remote site and central site can also be
described as the site of input origin (remote) and site of
endpoint (central) [1].

Telemedicine Telemedicine traditionally refers to the practice
of medicine at a distance using telecommunications
technology. However, while the majority of telemedicine
involves a physician or healthcare provider administering
care to a patient, it can also involve practitioner-to-practitioner
consultation, education, preceptorship, and proctorship.
598    J. S. Perez and S. Tsuda

Telehealth Telehealth is a broader application of
telecommunications technology compared to telemedicine,
which expands to health administration, public health, health
surveillance, or population health. Telemedicine is considered a
subset of telehealth, while telehealth itself is often referred to
as a subset of the larger umbrella term, “E-health.” While the
content of this chapter falls under telehealth by this definition,
we will refer primarily to telemedicine as the overarching
category under which surgical applications fall under.

Telematics The World Health Organization (WHO) utilizes
telematics as a composite term to include both telemedicine
and telehealth, referring broadly to the communication of
health information over a distance.

Telestration There may be two types of telestration: 2D and
3D. 2D telestration is currently most widely applied for surgical
training purposes. This consists of superimposing a two-
dimensional graphic over the working field which is typically
seen by the instructor, trainer, or proctor and the learner or
examinee (Fig. 32.1). This can be applied as a digital drawing
or superimposed icons or figures using a computer pad or
computer mouse. 3D telestration is where a superimposed
graphic is displayed over the perceived working field of the
learner or examinee using two separate images simulating a
3D object. This is commonly found in robotic consoles and in
developing virtual reality platforms and is an example of
augmented reality.




Figure 32.1 Simulated surgery on cadaver with simultaneous 2D
telestration by an off-site telementor. Viticus Center, Las Vegas, NV
                   Chapter 32.   Teleproctoring in Surgery   599

Telesurgery Telesurgery involves the use of telecommunications
to facilitate all or parts of surgical procedures. It may also
involve aided facilitation by an instructor or preceptor to a
learner or mentee at the central site where the procedure
is being performed. Teleproctorship would not be included
in telesurgery since direct involvement of the proctor over
the examinee or assessee would not be usual in proctorship
except in emergency or unusual circumstances. Robotic-
assisted surgery is an example of telesurgery or tele-assisted
surgery since the surgeon communicates to the surgical
platform from a console over wired communication, even
though they may be only a few feet away. In 2002, a robotic-
assisted cholecystectomy was performed trans-continentally
from New York City to Strasbourg, France, using high-speed
terrestrial networks [11]. Telestration may serve an integral
role in telesurgery, where one surgeon is aiding another from
a remote location.
   When performing tele-assisted surgery or telesurgery in an
experimental, novel, or unusual circumstance, having institu-
tional board review (IRB) approval is a critical component.
Vigilance must be taken to assure that at any time, a qualified
surgeon or healthcare provider can intervene in an immedi-
ate capacity should technical or clinical difficulties arise dur-
ing direct patient care.

Telepreceptorship A telepreceptorship is a period of
instruction, usually for a limited time that can range from
days to years, where a physician or learner acquires clinical
knowledge and skills to improve their performance of specific
surgical evaluations, management of diseases, techniques, or
procedures using telecommunications technology.

Telepreceptor A telepreceptor is an expert surgeon, defined
as a surgeon who has comprehensive and authoritative
knowledge and skill in their area of precepting, who imparts
their knowledge and skills in a defined setting and for a
defined period of instruction to a preceptee using telemedicine.
600   J. S. Perez and S. Tsuda

Telepreceptee A telepreceptee is a physician or learner with a
gap in knowledge or skills seeking specific and individualized
training under telemedical modalities to supplement or
expand knowledge and skills acquired during their formal
training.

Teleproctorship A teleproctorship is a supervised examination
or assessment, involving either a real clinical or simulated
evaluation or procedure, using telemedicine. There may be a
checklist, pass/fail grading, or global rating scale applied by an
observer or evaluator (proctor) to a physician or learner.

Teleproctor A teleproctor is a person, not always an expert in
the area of proctorship, who is nonetheless trained on
appropriate evaluation or assessment in the specific area of
proctorship, who monitors and evaluates a physician or
learner either in a real or simulated environment using
telemedicine. A proctor differs from a preceptor in that they
function as a passive observer and evaluator, and do not
directly involve themselves in patient care or procedural
execution as the context is an examination or assessment. In
the real clinical environment, a proctor is usually a recognized
expert in the area of assessment but may not be one in a
simulated examination where the stakes are not critical. In
the real clinical setting, there may be rare cases where the
proctor may need to intervene on an emergency basis if
patient safety becomes an issue. In those cases, however, it is
important that the proctor be adequately licensed and
credentialed in the institution, state, or region in which the
proctoring is occurring.

Telementoring Mentoring is advising or training in a setting
that is consensual and collaborative for the purpose of
imparting knowledge and skills. In telementoring, synchronous
and two-way interaction is usually an essential part of a
meaningful mentoring experience, although asynchronous
methods may be used. Telementoring can utilize verbal
communication, telestration, or telesurgery as part of the
                   Chapter 32.   Teleproctoring in Surgery   601

educational      model.      Telementoring         differs   from
telepreceptorship by scope: a mentorship is a broader
cultivation of knowledge and skill, while a preceptorship
usually is more focused and defined. An example of
telementorship would be supervision of a laparoscopic expert
over a laparoscopic novice for a period of cases to help foster
the general skill set. Alternatively, a t­ elepreceptorship would
be more specific and goal-oriented: an example might be a
6-week supervision of laparoscopic cholecystectomies to
remediate a surgeon on the safe performance of that specific
procedure.

Telementor A telementor is an expert surgeon, at a remote
site, who imparts their clinical knowledge and skills in a
defined setting and for a defined time to a learner or student
(mentee), who resides in a central site as previously described.
The telementor must be appropriately credentialed in the site,
and ideally be an expert in the area of mentoring. The
telementor may intervene in the clinical or simulated activities
using the telecommunications interface.

Telementee A telementee is the learner or student who, at the
central site, is the recipient of the teaching of the telementor.
The telementee will ideally be able to interact in real time
with the telementor to allow for immediate feedback and
adjustments to feedback, although asynchronous sharing of
information may also be used (such as the telementee sending
videos of procedures for evaluation by the telementor later).

Telemonitoring Telemonitoring is either one-way or two-way
monitoring (evaluation) of behaviors, functions, or procedures
performed by physicians or other healthcare providers.
Telemonitors may not necessarily be content experts in the
field of practice being monitored but may be authorized or
trained in some capacity to provide surveillance from a
credentialing,    licensing,  or   regulatory       standpoint.
Telemonitoring may fall under a greater umbrella of
telemanagement, which in the healthcare setting would refer
602   J. S. Perez and S. Tsuda

to the use of telecommunications to facilitate administration
of a healthcare organization’s functions.

Telemonitor A telemonitor is a person who supervises or
monitors learners or subjects using telecommunications
technologies. A telemonitor is a general term for an observer
who does not directly participate in patient care, as they are
serving in an observatory manner only. An example of a
telemonitor would be an agent of a privileging committee or
oversight organization. There have been emerging
conversations of having specialists from fields outside of
medicine observe and critique surgical techniques – for
example, in a crowd-sourcing capacity. Obstacles to
telemonitoring in this way must still be addressed in terms of
its validity, and in regard to patient privacy.

Teleconsulting Teleconsulting is evaluation of patient(s),
patient data, or consultation regarding patient management
from a remote site using telecommunications technology. On
one level, teleconsulting has been used since the inception of
basic technologies such as the telephone. The teleconsultant,
by definition, does not have the ability to physically interact
with the patient, except through the telecommunications
interface. Improvements in technology have allowed
teleconsulting through combined, two-way audio-visual
communication as with inhospital mobile interfaces (robots
that move from room to room) that allow physicians to
evaluate and speak with patients from any distance. In the
radiology field, asynchronous teleconsulting has been
prominent with remote readings of radiographic images.

Teleconsultant A teleconsultant is a physician or healthcare
provider at a remote site who evaluates a patient, and/or
patient data, and who presents an opinion of his or her
findings and/or recommendations for further evaluation or
treatment to the patient or other healthcare provider at the
remote site, using a telecommunications interface.
                   Chapter 32.   Teleproctoring in Surgery    603

Remote Patient Management Remote patient management is
a subset of telehealth that allows for the supervision and
evaluation of patients in a nonoperative setting, using a
telecommunications interface. This may include mobile
applications that allow physicians or healthcare providers to
monitor patient labs, weight, vitals, diet, activity, or other
information important to a number of chronic diseases and
conditions.



Current Landscape of Telemedicine
Rapidly evolving technology has allowed practitioners to
participate in patient care from remote locations with increas-
ing frequency, and with less latency. The impact to learners
such as medical students and residents has allowed access to
a wide range of mentors. For practicing physicians, telemen-
toring and teleproctoring fulfill a goal of exposing a higher
number of providers to newer knowledge and techniques that
may be more efficacious, safe, or cost-effective compared to
the status quo. Telemedicine also aids in minimizing the delay
of current training in areas or institutions with lower funding,
infrastructure, environmental resources, or proximity to such
resources. Telecommunications technology has been used to
deliver patient care in austere and socially difficult environ-
ments such as the military, prisons, disaster relief sites, search
and rescue scenarios, and remote locations such as Antarctica.
   Advantages for remote technology have become increas-
ingly evident with COVID-19 and its associated challenges
due to provider scarcity, personal protective equipment
shortages, and need for physical distancing. In response to the
2020 COVID-19 pandemic, the Centers for Medicare &
Medicaid Services (CMS) relaxed regulations to telehealth
allowing for appropriate reimbursement and cross-state
delivery of care. Technological and privacy improvements by
over 200 vendors of telehealth software and hardware further
604   J. S. Perez and S. Tsuda

facilitated the use of telehealth, not just with patient care, but
with telementoring, teleproctorship, teleconsultation, and
other modalities of remote collaboration.


Obstacles

Learning Curves

Discourse surrounding technology-assisted medicine often
involves the learning curve of users. The coronavirus pan-
demic has likely led to a burst of use and delivery of telecom-
munications technology out of necessity. However, both
technical learning curves and those involved in adapting to
the limitations of remote collaboration require specific atten-
tion. Shortening the pathway to proficiency with telemedical
applications will be best addressed through directly address-
ing the technology-naive physician, integrating physician and
healthcare provider input into development of platforms and
protocols, and forming best practices for the rules of engage-
ment regarding various telemedicine applications. More data
is required to develop a language and common behavior for
communication during telemedicine applications. An exam-
ple would be the verbal cues for speaking in turn, without the
benefit of observing body language. Another example would
be a common nomenclature for directions, establishing if
“up,” for example, means “screen up,” or toward the head of
a patient.


Technological Limitations

While Internet, server, and infrastructure reliability has
improved with time, there are still several limitations that can
serve as barriers to adoption. Without addressing these issues,
frustration by early adoptees may in some cases lead to aban-
donment of telemedicine altogether. Time delays can be due
to transmitter, medium, or receiver limitations. Institutional
                   Chapter 32.   Teleproctoring in Surgery    605

firewalls often serve to slow transmittal of real-time data, and
in some situations, may prohibit them without administrative
approval. While some applications of telemedicine may not
require immediate, real-time feedback, those involving direct
patient care, especially in procedural settings, may increase
risk of injury to patients. Collaboration with information
technology personnel is essential. Improvements in transmit-
tal methods and mediums have made time delays in ideal
settings almost minimal, however, with the advent of 5G
information transfer, expansion of broadband fiber-optic net-
works, and improvements in the compression and unpacking
of data on the transmitter and receiver endpoints.
Cybersecurity and risk of cyberattacks pose an additional
layer of technological and regulatory complexity to telemedi-
cine. The 2020 widespread ransomware attack on the
Universal Health Services hospital system was an example of
how vulnerable institutional digital infrastructure can be.


Telementoring and Teleproctoring in Surgery
Advancements in surgical telemedicine, specifically telemen-
toring and teleproctoring, have had significant growth due to
intentional efforts to assess and improve the need for remote
medicine [9]. Recently, there has been a push to improve the
safety, reliability, transmission quality, ease of use, and cost of
telementoring and teleproctoring technology [12].
   The surgical field has progressively seen benefits associ-
ated with minimally invasive surgery (MIS). However, situa-
tions arise with training gaps that fail to produce enough safe
and capable surgeons to meet the growing demand for
MIS. Attempts have been made to establish surgical telemen-
toring programs (STMPs) to help alleviate this gap [13].
Telementoring via STMPs has been proposed by the SAGES
Project 6 for developing competencies in trauma, laparo-
scopic surgery, orthopedics, pediatrics, and transplant surgery.
The primary goal of the initiative is to provide a software-­
based space where mentors and mentees could collaborate to
606   J. S. Perez and S. Tsuda

eliminate the gap between advancements in new surgical
technology and the number of qualified surgeons to perform
them.
   Utilizing benefits of telementoring and teleproctoring
globally requires innovative solutions that address problems
both around the world and those specific to individual com-
munities. First, ongoing efforts are made to evaluate and
consider solutions for the financial burden of telementoring
[14]. This is particularly true in low resource countries. The
median cost of establishing a professional system can reach
$80,000 USD or more without accounting for annual mainte-
nance fees, which have been reported to be approximately
$10,000–$20,000 per year, depending on the type of telecom-
munications systems used. Additionally, administrative hur-
dles with manufactured telementoring systems can include
latency or broadband deficiencies, and legal, ethical, or pri-
vacy considerations [15].
   Traditional, in-person mentoring may be preferred by
most mentees, but studies have demonstrated that telemen-
toring and teleproctoring are not just beneficial in conferring
targeted competencies but show no difference between in-­
person mentoring and telementoring with regard to compli-
cation rates and operative times [16]. Teleproctoring, as
discussed earlier, differs from telementoring in that it assesses
an examination or evaluation for credentialing or certifica-
tion. As such, teleproctoring can be an ideal modality to
administer high-stakes certification programs like the Society
of American Gastrointestinal and Endoscopic Surgeons
(SAGES)/American College of Surgeons (ACS)/American
Board of Surgery (ABS)-endorsed Fundamentals of
Laparoscopic Surgery (FLS) and Fundamentals of Endoscopic
Surgery (FES) programs when distance for proctors and
assessees is an issue [17]. Costs associated with FLS exams
have prompted the evaluation and validation of teleproctor-
ing as a potential value solution while maintaining testing
reliability and validity. One study found no significant score
differences between in-person and remote proctoring of the
FLS exam [18].
                   Chapter 32.   Teleproctoring in Surgery   607

   While efforts to ensure the quality of training is main-
tained during both telementoring and teleproctoring to
account for the lack of in-person interaction, there can be
potential pitfalls secondary to the deficiencies in medium. A
study by Okrainec et al. showed great improvement of
Fundamentals of Laparoscopic Surgery (FLS) competencies
as measured through improvement of posttest and pretest
scores via telementoring over 3 days of training; however, of
the participants, only 2 out of 20 did well enough to pass the
skills test. These findings suggest that a curriculum should be
designed to have an appropriate duration for the baseline
skill sets of the assessees, adequate mentor training, and pre-­
activity evaluation of the duration required for adequate
transfer of competencies [19]. These factors may be depen-
dent on the esoteric nature of the skills being transferred. In
another study, participants were guided by telementoring
through damage-control and emergent field procedures with
no previous formal surgical training, as they were non-­
surgeon military personnel. These procedures consisted of
surgical airways, chest tube placements, and resuscitative
thoracotomies which were done with 100% effectiveness and
without complications as assessed by their proctors [20].
   Telementoring, telepreceptorship, or teleproctorship may
be resource intense, but varying levels of technological fidel-
ity can be applied to help curtail costs [21]. Levels of technol-
ogy and complexity range from simple verbal communication
via telephonic or simple radio means, off-the-shelf mobile
phone, tablet, or computer technologies, or preexisting infra-
structures available in the institution for nonmedical telecon-
ferencing. Healthcare providers can use this principle to
incrementally improve their telecommunications hardware
and software as their experience with the technology pro-
gresses. One study found a financial solution by utilizing a
novel, low-cost setup with readily available equipment includ-
ing personal computers, a laparoscopic stack, a video-­
capturing system, and free video-conferencing software
totaling $2750 USD [15]. Another recent study showed how
residents were able to engage in effective mentoring during
608   J. S. Perez and S. Tsuda

the COVID-19 pandemic using messaging software on smart
phones to train in laparoscopic surgery from the safety of
their homes [22]. Limiting factors such as transmittal speed
will become less inhibiting as high-speed Internet becomes
widely available. Networks such as 5G have been shown to be
equivalent, or superior, to fiber-optic transmission with
latency as little as 1–2 milliseconds and data transfer speeds
as high as a gigabit per second [15]. Consumer products con-
tinue to evolve to include wearables with augmented reality
technology. These products have shown benefit in multiple
settings to facilitate telementoring in rural and resource-poor
settings, with benefits including mentee procedural confi-
dence, decreasing errors, achieving better performance scores,
and shortening learning curve duration [23–25].


Discussion and Recommendations
Telemedicine has traditionally been hampered by barriers
that were both financial and cultural. Fear of technology or
the unwillingness to learn and adapt to new technologies
provides hurdles on the individual level, and financial or legal
constraints on the institutional level. Despite this, it appears
telemedicine is here to stay. The COVID-19 pandemic has
provided a setting for telemedicine to thrive out of necessity.
The advantages of utilizing these modalities include improve-
ments in physician accountability, adaptation of new proce-
dural skills, and overall healthcare quality.


Best Practice Recommendations

As with any emerging field, the dynamic nature and variabil-
ity of new data, opinions, guidelines and standards can make
adoption with institutional confidence challenging. Our goal
is to provide a framework for the safe and effective use of
telecommunications technology to implement telementoring,
                   Chapter 32.   Teleproctoring in Surgery   609

telepreceptorship, teleproctoring, telesurgery, and other
remote applications.
1. Quality: The quality of various telemedicine applications
   will only be as good and effective as the core training prin-
   ciples which it supplements. Both trainees and trainers
   should have shared expectations of their educational expe-
   rience. The SAGES ADOPT (Acquisition of Data
   Outcomes for Procedure Transfer) program is an example
   of a framework on which to build the telemedicine experi-
   ence. Instructors, mentors, preceptors, and proctors should
   be trained in their educational or evaluator modalities with
   in-person activities in a standardized way prior to com-
   mencing in telemedicine applications. Once trainers dem-
   onstrate competence in the in-person program, specific
   training for the telemedical modality should be
   undertaken.
2. Simulation: Whether applying telementoring, teleprecep-
   torship, or teleproctoring to a simulated or real clinical
   environment, simulating (practicing) the activity using all
   the remote technologies will help to avoid pitfalls, delays,
   confusion, or poor transfer of knowledge and skills. This
   also provides a dry run opportunity to identify and trou-
   bleshoot any technical or personnel issues that may arise
   during the planned activity (Fig. 32.2).
3. Security: Intentional cyberattacks or unintentional lapses
   in security can lead to a loss of patient privacy, or the pri-
   vacy of participants in telemedicine activities (i.e., the
   examination scores of assessees for a teleproctored exami-
   nation). Solutions include utilization of dedicated informa-
   tion technology personnel, robust firewalls, data encryption,
   closed-circuit channels when possible, and i­ndustry-­standard
   or industry-exceeding non-digital patient privacy practices
   (i.e., assuring that screens containing protected informa-
   tion are not readily viewed by passers-by). Cybersecurity
   insurance may be a consideration when institutional expo-
   sure warrants it.
610   J. S. Perez and S. Tsuda




Figure 32.2 Dry run setup for telementoring, central site, with IT
personnel. Viticus Center, Las Vegas, NV

4. Contingency planning: Almost inherent to the complexities
   of telecommunications is the expectation of systems fail-
   ures. These failures often derive from connection failures
   between transmitter and receiver. A robust, layered
   approach of engineering can attenuate the effects of a lost
   connection, regardless of duration. This may include over-
   lapping or contingency Internet connections, backup
   power supplies, the ability to enter a “safe default mode,”
   and a plan for “on-the-fly” diagnostics to help maintain
   endpoint communication, or to circumvent the main chan-
   nels to communicate issues to the endpoint users.
   Contingencies also include clinical protocols, especially
   with telesurgery or telementoring, where a trained pro-
   vider can intervene effectively if (1) a connection is dis-
   rupted, (2) endpoint users are providing inadequate or
   unsafe care, or (3) telecommunications appear to be ham-
   pering quality care.
                    Chapter 32.    Teleproctoring in Surgery      611

References
 1. Guidelines for the surgical practice of telemedicine. Society of
    American Gastrointestinal Endoscopic Surgeons. Surg Endosc.
    2000;14(10):975–9.
 2. Framework for post-residency surgical education and training.
    The Society of American Gastrointestinal Endoscopic Surgeons.
    Surg Endosc. 1994;8(9):1137–42.
 3. DeBackey M. Telemedicine has now come of age. Telemed J.
    1995;1:3–4.
 4. Bashshur RL. On the definition and evaluation of telemedicine.
    Telemed J. 1995;1(1):19–30.
 5. Houtchens BA, Allen A, Clemmer TP, Lindberg DA, Pedersen
    S. Telemedicine protocols and standards: development and
    implementation. J Med Syst. 1995;19(2):93–119.
 6. Sanders JH, Bashshur RL. Challenges to the implementation of
    telemedicine. Telemed J. 1995;1(2):115–23.
 7. McElroy JA, Day TM, Becevic M. The influence of tele-
    health for better health across communities. Prev Chronic Dis.
    2020;17:200254.
 8. Jin MX, Kim S, Miller LJ, et al. Telemedicine: current impact on
    the future. Cureus. 2020;12(8):e9891.
 9. Huang EY, Knight S, Guetter CR, et al. Telemedicine and tele-
    mentoring in the surgical specialties: a narrative review. Am J
    Surg. 2019;218(4):760–6.
10. Lesher AP, Shah SR. Telemedicine in the perioperative experi-
    ence. Semin Pediatr Surg. 2018;27(2):102–6.
11. Marescaux J, Leroy J, Rubino F, Smith M,Vix M, Simone M, Mutter
    D. Transcontinental robot-assisted remote telesurgery: feasibility
    and potential applications. Ann Surg. 2002;235(4):487–92.
12. Bogen EM, Schlachta CM, Ponsky T. White paper: technol-
    ogy for surgical telementoring-SAGES Project 6 Technology
    Working Group. Surg Endosc. 2019;33(3):684–90.
13. Camacho DR, Schlachta CM, Serrano OK, Nguyen NT. Logistical
    considerations for establishing reliable surgical telementoring
    programs: a report of the SAGES Project 6 Logistics Working
    Group. Surg Endosc. 2018;32(8):3630–3.
14. Erridge S, Yeung DKT, Patel HRH, Purkayastha S. Telementoring
    of surgeons: a systematic review. Surg Innov. 2019;26(1):95–111.
612   J. S. Perez and S. Tsuda

15. Singh S, Sharma V, Patel P, Anuragi G, Sharma RG. Telementoring:
    an overview and our preliminary experience in the setting
    up of a cost-effective telementoring facility. Indian J Surg.
    2016;78(1):70–3.
16. Bilgic E, Turkdogan S, Watanabe Y, et al. Effectiveness of tele-
    mentoring in surgery compared with on-site mentoring: a sys-
    tematic review. Surg Innov. 2017;24(4):379–85.
17. Mizota T, Kurashima Y, Poudel S, Watanabe Y, Shichinohe
    T, Hirano S. Step-by-step training in basic laparoscopic skills
    using two-way web conferencing software for remote coach-
    ing: a multicenter randomized controlled study. Am J Surg.
    2018;216(1):88–92.
18. Okrainec A, Vassiliou M, Jimenez MC, Henao O, Kaneva P, Matt
    RE. Remote FLS testing in the real world: ready for “prime
    time”. Surg Endosc. 2016;30(7):2697–702.
19. Okrainec A, Smith L, Azzie G. Surgical simulation in Africa: the
    feasibility and impact of a 3-day fundamentals of laparoscopic
    surgery course. Surg Endosc. 2009;23(11):2493–8.
20. Dawe P, Kirkpatrick A, Talbot M, et al. Tele-mentored damage-­
    control and emergency trauma surgery: a feasibility study using
    live-tissue models. Am J Surg. 2018;215(5):927–9.
21. Hung AJ, Chen J, Shah A, Gill IS. Telementoring and telesurgery
    for minimally invasive procedures. J Urol. 2018;199(2):355–69.
22. Trujillo Loli Y, D’Carlo Trejo Huamán M, Campos
    MS. Telementoring of in-home real-time laparoscopy using
    whatsapp messenger: an innovative teaching tool during the
    COVID-19 pandemic. A cohort study. Ann Med Surg (Lond).
    2021;62:481–4.
23. Rojas-Muñoz E, Cabrera ME, Lin C, et al. The System for
    Telementoring with Augmented Reality (STAR): a head-­
    mounted display to improve surgical coaching and confidence in
    remote areas. Surgery. 2020;167(4):724–31.
24. Datta N, MacQueen IT, Schroeder AD, et al. Wearable
    technology for global surgical teleproctoring. J Surg Educ.
    2015;72(6):1290–5.
25. Nguyen NT, Okrainec A, Anvari M, et al. Sleeve gastrectomy
    telementoring: a SAGES multi-institutional quality improve-
    ment initiative. Surg Endosc. 2018;32(2):682–7.
Chapter 33
Training for Quality:
Fundamentals Program
Sofia Valanci and Gerald M. Fried




Introduction
Over the years, our priority to protect patient safety has
influenced the way we teach medicine. We have evolved
from case numbers toward more competency-based pro-
grams to ensure the proficiency of our trainees. Tasked with
the goal to improve quality and safety for patients undergo-
ing laparoscopic surgery, the Society of American
Gastrointestinal and Endoscopic Surgeons (SAGES)
launched the fundamentals program in 2004 with the funda-

S. Valanci
Doctoral student in Experimental Surgery, Education
Concentration, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada
e-mail: sofia.valanci@mail.mcgill.ca
G. M. Fried (*)
Professor of Surgery and Associate Dean for Education Technology
and Innovation, Montreal, QC, Canada
Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, McGill University,
Montreal, QC, Canada
Director, Steinberg Centre for Simulation and Interactive Learning,
Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, McGill University,
Montreal, QC, Canada
e-mail: gerald.fried@mcgill.ca
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature    613
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_33
614   S. Valanci and G. M. Fried

mentals of laparoscopic surgery program. This initiative,
designed to teach the knowledge, judgment, and skills that
form the foundation for performance of laparoscopic sur-
gery, was a game-changer by presenting not only a robust
educational curriculum but also an assessment component
that had metrics that were validated to the level of a high-
stakes examination. The success of the FLS program led the
way to subsequent development of analogous programs to
teach flexible endoscopy and safe use of surgical energy. All
three programs were developed jointly by surgeons and edu-
cators. Whether it be the fundamentals of laparoscopic sur-
gery (FLS), the fundamentals of endoscopic surgery (FES),
or the fundamental use of surgical energy (FUSE), the end
goal, albeit in different but related areas, is to achieve and
verify competency and improve patient safety.


Fundamentals of Laparoscopic Surgery

Development

Laparoscopic surgery was introduced into general surgical
practice in the late 1980s. Its potential to benefit patients was
immediately apparent. There were great pressures on practic-
ing surgeons to adopt minimally invasive techniques in their
practices or risk becoming rapidly obsolete. As a result, week-
end courses popped up everywhere, but they were inconsis-
tent in their structure and content, and were often run by
industry, who was highly motivated to expand the market.
Armed with a diploma from a weekend course, surgeons
returned to their hospitals, received privileges to practice
laparoscopy, and then introduced laparoscopy in their prac-
tices. Although many surgeons were skillful laparoscopists,
others were not and a spate of serious complications occurred,
such as bile duct and major vascular injuries. SAGES saw the
responsibility, as a major specialty society in this field, to take
a leadership role to provide surgeons with a high-quality edu-
cational curriculum of didactic and simulation-based techni-
cal skills training. By including a didactic and hands-on test in
Chapter 33. Training for Quality: Fundamentals Program    615

this program, the verification that the learners had acquired
the minimal acceptable knowledge and skills to practice
safely would provide an additional measure of safety.
   The development of a training curriculum covering basic
skills and knowledge to perform laparoscopic surgery safely
was led by a SAGES task force. Four major principles guided
FLS development including:

• Assessment of the cognitive and psychomotor domains
  that are fundamental to the practice of laparoscopic sur-
  gery (i.e., the foundational knowledge and skills to build
  on).
• Focus only on those aspects that are specific to laparo-
  scopic surgery, assuming the learner is trained in the fun-
  damentals of open surgical practice and perioperative care
  (not to teach all aspects of surgery).
• Be agnostic to specific procedures or specialties by being
  relevant to all laparoscopic surgery and surgeons.
• Include a reproducible, reliable, and validated assessment
  that can be administered securely through a series of
  regional test centers by trained proctors with the standards
  of a high-stakes examination.

   A further aspiration was to have FLS incorporated as part
of certification of all surgeons at the level of the American
Board of Surgery. This was accomplished. The American
College of Surgeons (ACS) partnered with SAGES during
the development phase and is a full and equal partner in the
program now.


Components and Validation

The FLS end goals are to establish proficiency criteria and
ensure a minimal standard of care for all patients undergoing
laparoscopic surgery. As stated on the FLS program web site,
FLS was developed “to provide surgical residents, fellows and
practicing physicians an opportunity to learn the fundamen-
tals of laparoscopic surgery in a consistent, scientifically
616   S. Valanci and G. M. Fried

accepted format; and to test cognitive, surgical decision-­
making, and technical skills, all with the goal of improving the
quality of patient care” [1].
    The program is not procedure, discipline, or anatomic loca-
tion specific. It includes didactic and manual skills compo-
nents provided online through a highly visual interface rich
with multimedia content. The didactic part consists of a web-­
based study guide including theory modules, patient scenar-
ios, and explanations of fundamental technical skills. The
modules describe equipment and tools of laparoscopic sur-
gery, energy sources, patient considerations, anesthesia,
patient positioning, establishment and physiology of pneu-
moperitoneum, abdominal access and trocar placement, tis-
sue handling, exposure and examination of the abdomen and
pelvis, biopsy techniques, hemorrhage and hemostasis, tissue
approximation, exiting the abdomen, and postoperative care
[2] (Table 33.1). Each module ends with practice questions.
Study material is presented in a self-paced curriculum [3],
supported by references and self-assessment. The formal
evaluation of the didactic knowledge is through a 90-minute
multiple-choice proctored exam taken at a certified test site.
    The manual skills test consists of five tasks: peg transfer,
pattern cut, ligating loop, extracorporeal suturing and knot
tying, and intracorporeal suturing and knot tying (Table 33.2).
A curriculum has been developed to guide practice with
quantitative proficiency goals. Individuals who reach these
proficiency levels on self-assessment are highly likely to pass
the proctored test. This hands-on training and assessment is
performed in a box trainer with a built-in camera connected
to a monitor. Tasks are scored for efficiency and precision;
penalties are assigned for errors. To develop the tasks, experts
reviewed a variety of laparoscopic procedures and listed
those skills that would be required to perform laparoscopic
surgery. These included working with a monocular optical
system, through trocars, using both the dominant and non-
dominant hands to manipulate tissue, provide optimal
­exposure for dissection, secure a tubular structure, suture, and
 tie knots. These skills were modeled into tasks and metrics
 were developed [4].
Chapter 33. Training for Quality: Fundamentals Program      617

Table 33.1 Didactive FLS content [1]
Preoperative considerations       Laparoscopic equipment
                                  Energy sources
                                  OR setup
                                  Patient selection
                                  Preoperative assessment
Intraoperative considerations    Anesthesia
                                 Patient positioning
                                 Pneumoperitoneum
                                 establishment
                                 Trocar placement
                                 Physiology of
                                 pneumoperitoneum
                                 Exiting the abdomen
Basic laparoscopic procedures    Current laparoscopic
                                 procedures
                                 Diagnostic laparoscopy
                                 Biopsy
                                 Laparoscopic suturing
                                 Hemorrhage and hemostasis
Postoperative care and
complications
Manual skills training           Practice
                                 FLS trainer assembly
                                 5 tasks


Self-Assessment Curriculum and Proficiency Targets

Both components of the FLS test have been extensively vali-
dated. The knowledge-based assessment was developed
through an iterative process by expert surgeons and educa-
tors with expertise in development of high-stakes examina-
tions. Questions were screened for relevance by surgeons and
then reviewed by the committee. Questions that performed
poorly were either revised or eliminated, and two examina-
tions were prepared for beta testing. The test measures
laparoscopic-­specific knowledge. Self-rating of competence
and experience correlated with test scores [5]. The internal
consistency of the cognitive test items was 0.81 [4, 6].
618    S. Valanci and G. M. Fried

Table 33.2 Performance-based proficiency levels FLS tasks [1]
                 Errors                               Time
                 (penalties                           allowed
Task name        assigned)      Repetitions           (seconds)
Peg transfer     No drops       2 consecutives         48
                 outside field  +10
                 of view        nonconsecutive
Pattern cut       Cuts within       2 consecutives     98
                  2 mm of line
Ligating loop     Up to 1 mm        2 consecutives     53
                  accuracy
Extracorporeal    error             2 consecutives    136
suture            allowed
Intracorporeal                      2 consecutives    112
suture                              +10
                                    nonconsecutive


   The manual skills component shows evidence of both face
and content validity. Laparoscopic surgeons developed a list
of 14 skills required to perform safe laparoscopic surgery, and
11 of those skills are represented in the 5 tasks of the test. The
rest (safe use of the electrosurgical unit, cannulation, and
trocar placement) are part of the didactic program [5]. The
FLS metrics showed significant differences between novice,
intermediate, and expert surgeons, providing evidence for
construct validity. FLS pass scores were set to differentiate
competent from incompetent surgeons in the basic skills
required for laparoscopy [4]. Predictive validity was estab-
lished by first assessing operative performance in the clinical
setting using the Global Operative Assessment of
Laparoscopic Skills (GOALS); the correlation between FLS
and GOALS scored within 2 weeks of each other was 0.81 [7].


Outcomes

In 2007, Ritter and Scott established benchmarks for practice.
Using the FLS box, both authors, who are fellowship-trained
Chapter 33. Training for Quality: Fundamentals Program        619

laparoscopic surgeons, performed the five tasks for a total of
five repetitions. They defined target performance, errors, and
time for each of the tasks (Table 33.2). The metrics are simpli-
fied to facilitate self-scoring by trainees [8]. They then applied
this curriculum to medical students (novices) with access to
the manual skills videos and a proctor. Students achieved
96% proficiency levels of all tasks after a mean time of 9.7 h
of practice and 119 mean repetitions, and 100% achieved a
passing score on the FLS examination [9]. Other studies have
expanded on the benchmarks, to provide for adequate resi-
dent preparation for more complex laparoscopic cases. By
using real FLS scores from previous residents, a group estab-
lished PGY-specific benchmarks by averaging the total time
to complete each task. Some of the PGY-specific benchmarks
were faster than the proficiency times that have been used
previously. After the PGY-specific benchmarks were imple-
mented, resident performance significantly improved com-
pared to residents that were given the expert proficiency
goals. Time to reach the expert goals was shorter, giving
senior residents more time to practice more advanced tasks
[10]. A previous study had also demonstrated that setting
more attainable goals improved performance in the FLS [11].
   Because FLS is a self-paced curriculum, studies have sug-
gested guidelines for skills practice; participants have an 84%
chance of passing the exam on their first try if they achieve a
mean of 53 s for peg transfer, 50 s for pattern cut, 87 s for
endoloop, 99 s for extracorporeal suturing, and 96 s for intra-
corporeal suturing [3]. Following the FLS curriculum has
resulted not only in higher rates of passing the test, but the
improvement has been found to be durable. One study found
a 91% retention of skills at 13 months for all 5 skills without
retraining [12], and 90% for intracorporeal suturing at
6 months [13]. Another study found that students who com-
pleted the FLS curriculum achieved 86–87% pass rate at
6.5 months without retraining, improving to 96% at
12.5 months with a refresher program [14], demonstrating
that ongoing training in the FLS simulator is beneficial and
minimizes skill loss over time.
620   S. Valanci and G. M. Fried

     Studies have provided evidence that performance in FLS
correlates with intraoperative laparoscopic performance
(r = 0.77). An FLS score of 70 predicted a GOALS score of 20
(experienced surgeon) [15]. In a randomized controlled trial,
residents training to proficiency using FLS had a significant
improvement in laparoscopic skills in the operating room as
measured by GOALS scores (increase of 6.1 ± 1.3 vs 1.8 ± 2.1).
This required a mean of 7.5 h (2.5 h supervised and 5 h of
individual practice). The increase in GOALS scores is equiva-
lent to the difference in performance between a first year and
a third year resident [16].
     Through didactic coursework based on the FLS curricu-
 lum, the introduction of FLS skills training, proctored hands-
 on surgery, feedback, and support from industry and
 ­
 governments, FLS has been a cornerstone for training sur-
geons in remote areas or developing countries. In Ghana, for
example, laparoscopic surgery had not been widely per-
formed before 2017. Using the FLS curriculum and box
trainer tasks, an expatriate laparoscopic surgeon trained 78
surgeons in a 3-year span. Only 5% had ever been the
­primary surgeon for a laparoscopic case before, 22% had
 assisted on a laparoscopic case, and the rest had only
 observed or had some previous theoretical knowledge. Before
 the introduction of the FLS curriculum, laparoscopic surgery
 in this hospital was not available; during the time of the study,
 a total of 82 laparoscopic surgeries were performed. During
 the first year, the laparoscopic surgeon was the primary
 operator in 100% of the cases; during the second and third
 year, local newly trained surgeons became the primary opera-
 tors in 41% and 79% of the cases, respectively [17].
     In Mongolia, only 2% of gallbladders were removed lapa-
 roscopically in 2005. One team used the didactic portion of
 the FLS to teach surgeons. In a 9-year span, the team created
 sustainable laparoscopic surgery for all of the country. Now
 cholecystectomy is performed nearly 80% of the time in 19 of
 the 21 states with over 315 healthcare workers trained. The
 first cohort study showed improved overall outcomes, with
 lower infection rates, shorter hospitalization stays, shorter
Chapter 33. Training for Quality: Fundamentals Program     621

recovery time, and lower overall cost. Complication rates
were 0.7% with a conversion rate of 2% for the first 4 years
of training. Laparoscopic adoption benefited women in
Mongolia, where the rate of gallbladder disease is 70%. One
study has reported that, even though mean laparoscopic sur-
gery cost is higher, its adoption has been cost-effective for
both the patient and the payers’ perspectives, because of the
cost-related savings related to shorter time to return to work,
improved quality of life, and fewer complications [18–22].
    In Botswana, laparoscopy was introduced in 2004, but not
widely adopted. With the support of the Ministry of Health, a
program to teach laparoscopic cholecystectomy was estab-
lished. After having taught the skills, the workshops transi-
tioned to the operating room, and programs such as FLS were
used. Dr. Allan Okrainec from Toronto telementored sur-
geons weekly and showed that they achieved higher scores
than non-telementored surgeons in the same area.
Telementoring surgeons achieved 100% FLS pass scores
compared with only 38% of non-telementored surgeons [23].
The number of laparoscopic cases increased, and the
­proportion of cases completed by local surgeons increased
 from 31% to 98%. Seven years after the program was estab-
 lished, better patient outcomes were observed, with fewer
 complications, shorter hospital stays, and a conversion rate
 within standards (5.2%) [24].


Fundamentals of Endoscopic Surgery

Development

According to the American Board of Surgery (ABS),
endoscopy accounts for up to 40% of the general surgeon’s
case volume [25], and, as reported in 2010, 39.8% of the
practice of general surgeons in rural areas is made up of
endoscopic procedures [26]. However, even when docu-
menting a reasonable volume of flexible gastrointestinal
(GI) endoscopy procedures, graduates may have a chal-
622   S. Valanci and G. M. Fried

lenging time obtaining privileges to perform endoscopy at
their hospital. Although case numbers are one surrogate
that has been used to determine competence, variability of
cases, quality of coaching, individual learning curves, and
quality of the educational experience also contribute to the
development of flexible endoscopy skill. Current guidelines
require general surgery residents to complete at least 35
upper and 50 lower GI endoscopies [25, 27]. However, the
literature suggests that procedural numbers are poor pre-
dictors of skill, which is why an objective, validated assess-
ment of knowledge and skill was needed [28, 29]. The FES
was the second fundamentals program developed by
SAGES, and was modeled on the experience developing
the FLS program [27, 30].


Components and Validation

The goal of the FES program is to establish a standard by
which all endoscopists can be measured. Passing FES would
establish that the candidate demonstrated the knowledge and
skills required, at a minimum, to perform flexible GI endos-
copy [29].
   Like FLS, FES is a validated high-stakes examination of
endoscopic cognitive and manual skills. It is comprised of a
multiple-choice test of knowledge and a hands-on virtual
reality skills test. The program also provides extensive didac-
tic online material, presented in a highly visual manner.
Topics include technology and equipment, patient prepara-
tion, anesthesia monitoring and recovery, upper endoscopy,
lower GI endoscopy, ERCP, and endoscopic therapies
(Table 33.3). The didactic part of FES is available free of
charge and can be accessed through a web-based study guide;
it contains printable material and practice questions. Each
chapter was reviewed by a panel of expert endoscopists (sur-
geons and gastroenterologists) to ensure that the content is
clearly presented, accurate, and up-to-date [31].
   The skills test includes five modules designed to assess
scope navigation, loop reduction, retroflexion, traversing a
Chapter 33. Training for Quality: Fundamentals Program           623

sphincter, management of insufflation, mucosal evaluation,
and targeting (Table 33.4) [1]. The high-stakes skills assess-
ment is conducted using the GI Mentor II, GI Bronch
Mentor, or GI Mentor Express from Simbionix [1, 32].


Table 33.3 Didactive FES content [1]
Technology and equipment               Characteristics of
                                       endoscopes
                                       Setup
                                       Troubleshooting
                                       Equipment care
Patient preparation                    Informed consent
                                       Anesthesia risk
                                       assessment
                                       Bowel preparation
                                       Prophylactic antibiotic
                                       therapy
                                       Management of
                                       anticoagulation
Sedation and analgesia                 Monitoring
                                       Moderate sedation
                                       Medications
                                       Recovery
                                       Alternative sedation
                                       Small-caliber endoscopy
Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy       Indications
                                       Preparation
                                       Diagnostic EGD
                                       Complications
Lower endoscopy                        Indications
                                       Preparation
Performing lower GI procedures         Diagnostic colonoscopy
                                       Rigid endoscopy
                                       Lower GI endoscopy
                                       Important considerations
Lower GI anatomy, pathology and        Pathology recognition
complications                          Complications
                                                      (continued)
624   S. Valanci and G. M. Fried

Table 33.3 (continued)
Didactic ERCP                           Indications
                                        Preparation
                                        Performance of ERCP
                                        Complications
                                        Pathology recognition
Hemostasis                              Nonthermal techniques
                                        Thermal techniques
Tissue removal                          Resective techniques
                                        Sampling techniques
                                        Ablative techniques
Enteral access                          Preparation
                                        Indications
                                        PEG
                                        Procedures with PEJ
                                        Replacement
                                        Complications
Endoscopic therapies                    Dilation
                                        Foreign body removal
                                        Transgastric
                                        laparoendoscopy
                                        Choledochoscopy
                                        Intraoperative endoscopy
                                        Tumor localization


Table 33.4 FES         Scope navigation
tasks [33]
                       Loop reduction
                       Retroflexion
                       Mucosal evaluation
                       Targeting


   FES has been validated with the goal of setting a passing
score that must be achieved by an endoscopist with a mini-
mum level of competency [31, 34, 35]. The FES cognitive
evaluation was developed by SAGES in consultation with
Chapter 33. Training for Quality: Fundamentals Program      625

Kryterion Inc., a company dedicated to developing high-­
stakes examinations [31]. High-volume clinicians in the field
of endoscopy (both surgeons and gastroenterologists) were
tasked with developing multiple-choice questions for the
cognitive component. Beta testing was then carried out on
393 participants [31]. Items were analyzed for validity evi-
dence. Items with unusual performance were reviewed by
the task force, and the decision was then made to retain,
delete, or rework each question. A pool of 220 final ques-
tions was then used to create 2 parallel test forms with 75
questions each [31]. A panel of 11 experts discussed what
the “minimally qualified” or “just acceptable” candidate
should be expected to know and do. The items were then
correlated with level of experience, demonstrating that
years of training and experience were strongly correlated
with higher cognitive scores [31].
   For the hands-on test, the fundamental skills were identi-
fied by a group of expert endoscopists using an iterative
process until a final list was developed. The original skills
included scope navigation, loop reduction, retroflexion, tra-
versing a sphincter, management of insufflation, mucosal
evaluation, and targeting [34]. Multiple simulators were con-
sidered, but no commercially available VR system met all the
needs required for FES. Thus, after proposals were consid-
ered, a virtual reality simulator was selected, and tasks and
metrics were constructed to evaluate the fundamental skills
identified by the expert panel. Simbionix and SAGES forged
a partnership and the hands-on skills component of FES was
created. Although the specific details of the assessment met-
rics of FES are confidential, the hands-on component has
been tested for both reliability and validity. Internal consis-
tency reliability for all tasks was >0.70, and test-retest reli-
ability and the intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) was
0.85 [34]. As for validity, the total FES score correlated (0.73)
with the experience of the participants [34]. Also, as an addi-
tional measure, a final verification of validity was made with
25 experienced endoscopists who obtained a pass rate of
92% [34].
626   S. Valanci and G. M. Fried

Outcomes

Since the FES manual skills component was not designed as
a training system, test-takers have no previous access to these
specific simulation modules prior to testing. Commercially
available practice modules, however, are commercially avail-
able on the GI Mentor and other simulators. The commer-
cially available GI Mentor simulator module scores have
been noted to correlate well with prior endoscopy experi-
ence, and authors have suggested it may be a valuable tool to
prepare for the FES evaluation [36]. Other simulation train-
ing curricula and p  ­ ractice in the clinical setting have also
proven to be valuable preparation for FES certification.
   FES has provided a validated standard by which endosco-
pists from different training pathways can be assessed for
competence. Experience in residency training varies from one
program to another. One study showed that endoscopy expo-
sure in surgical training, without supplemental study, resulted
in a 79.5% pass rate [37]. Thus, in order to achieve higher pass
rates in FES, curricula have to be improved. To support this,
SAGES developed a Fundamentals of Endoscopy Curriculum,
which can be used by all training programs [30]. Studies have
found that the incorporation of proficiency-based curricula in
training programs is effective and efficient in preparing resi-
dents for the FES skills test [33, 38]. Additional simulation
training, beyond reaching the minimum proficiency level, is
very useful for trainees in preparation for the test, regardless
of prior experience [33]. After the formal curriculum training,
84% residents passed the manual portion of the exam, signifi-
cantly higher than without the curriculum [39].
   Studies have shown that the total score on FES correlates
highly with lower endoscopic experience. For example, 77%
of participants with an experience of 0–24 lower endoscopy
cases pass on the first try, while 97% of those with experience
of >200 cases pass on their first attempt [34, 40]. Another
study showed that it takes an average of 103 global clinical
endoscopy cases to pass the technical exam [37].
Chapter 33. Training for Quality: Fundamentals Program        627

   To our knowledge only one study has correlated FES
scores and evaluation of endoscopy performance in the clini-
cal setting. In this study, a score of 15 or greater on the Global
Assessment of Gastrointestinal Endoscopic Score (GAGES)
clinically was associated with a higher initial passing score on
the FES exam; further, FES manual skills scores correlated
positively with clinical performance, providing evidence of
validity for the FES hands-on test [41]. Like FLS, FES has
been also adopted as a requirement for certification by the
American Board of Surgery.
   Additional research is required to correlate FES scores
with clinical outcomes, e.g., polyp detection rate.


Fundamental Use of Surgical Energy (FUSE)

Development

The FUSE program was established to address an unmet
need in educating surgeons, nurses, and other OR personnel
on the safe use of energy in surgery, FUSE emerged as the
third SAGES fundamentals program [42]. Historically, heat
has been applied to control hemorrhage for centuries. The
widely known monopolar electrosurgical generator was
developed in the 1920s by Drs. William Bovie and Harvey
Cushing [43]. Based on the physics of electrosurgery, a wide
variety of energy devices have been developed to control
bleeding and divide tissues in the operating room and other
interventional suites.
   Despite their presence in virtually every operating suite,
these energy devices remain poorly understood. If not used
correctly, they can result in severe complications. For exam-
ple, operating room fires were ranked as one of the top ten
health technology hazards [44]. Also, unrecognized injuries
from energy devices can be highly morbid, with an estimated
25.2% complications rate; 18% of surgeons have personally
experienced a burn during laparoscopy [45–49]. In 2011
628   S. Valanci and G. M. Fried

SAGES assessed their members and found that 31% did not
know how to handle an operating room fire, 31% could not
identify the device least likely to interfere with a pacemaker,
13% did not know that a thermal injury could extend beyond
the jaws of the bipolar instrument and 10% thought that a
dispersive pad could be cut to fit a child [50]. No standardized
curriculum or textbook information was available to under-
stand the principles of surgical energy, which is why the
FUSE curriculum was conceived as an effort to promote
patient safety [42].


Components and Validation

The premise of the FUSE program is that, by understanding
the underlying principles of each device, users can use energy
devices to their fullest potential, prevent complications, and
improve the outcomes and safety of surgery [51].
   The FUSE program provides a free online course to dis-
seminate knowledge [52]. In the beginning both didactic
lectures and hands-on stations were included, but subse-
quently the hands-on station was eliminated when it became
clear that the content could be more practically disseminated
by an online or text program. A simulation-based workshop
can be added to vividly demonstrate the principles of the
FUSE program, but is not a part of the course [53]. An
assessment test is available to verify that the learner has
acquired the knowledge provided in the FUSE program. To
date, this is a voluntary self-evaluation. Passing this test pro-
vides verification that the participant is proficient in the safe
use of energy-­based devices in the OR or other procedural
settings.
   Topics included in the curriculum are fundamental physics
of each energy device, principles of safe use of the currently
available and soon to be introduced forms of energy and elec-
trical tools in the OR (as well as some on the horizon), recog-
nition of faulty equipment, troubleshooting, application of
Chapter 33. Training for Quality: Fundamentals Program      629

correct settings, and appropriate indications of specific energy
tools and technology in the OR [51] (Table 33.5).
   The FUSE program was developed by SAGES and
Kryterion Inc. The FUSE examination has been validated
using established psychometric processes, and two forms of
the examination have been beta tested. Each exam started
with 160 questions measuring 62 test objectives. Following
beta testing, the performance of each question was evaluated,
and 72 questions were selected in alignment with the content
blueprint. The individual expert ratings for each question
were averaged to establish a passing score [54].


Outcomes

Evidence has demonstrated that FUSE is useful for both
surgeons and trainees. A study has shown that studying the
didactic material for a minimum of 2 h is associated with a
much improved probability of passing the test [54]. The first
study in which FUSE was piloted demonstrated an increase
in median correct answers from 55% to 90% in the posttest.

Table 33.5 Didactic FUSE content [51]
Fundamentals of electrosurgery
Mechanisms and prevention of adverse effects
Monopolar instruments
Bipolar devices
Radiofrequency for soft tissue ablations
Endoscopic devices
Ultrasonic energy devices
Microwave energy devices
Energy devices in pediatric surgery
Integration of energy systems with other medical devices
630   S. Valanci and G. M. Fried

Another study of the durability of the FUSE course training
found, at 3 months, the examination score was 71% [53].
Although there are not many studies focusing on outcomes of
FUSE with respect to clinical events (e.g., burns, fires, etc.),
some studies have commented on the clinical impact and the
improved safety when using energy instruments by under-
standing the fundamentals [55].


Current Uses of Fundamentals Programs
Currently both FLS and FES certifications are required of
graduating general surgery residents prior to certification by
the American Board of Surgery [27, 30]. Recently, the
American Board of Obstetrics and Gynecology has also man-
dated FLS certification for all graduating residents [30]. FLS
is encouraged, but not mandatory, around the world, with
more than 30 countries having incorporated the FLS program
in some way. According to public access data, as of 2015, more
than 10,000 FLS certifications have been issued [1]; this has
risen to 25,000 as of 2020.
   Even though the need for FUSE has been acknowledged
widely, it is still underutilized. However, FUSE is highly rated
among participants [56, 57]. FUSE France went live in 2015 as
a mandatory program to be taken every 3 years by all sur-
geons and trainees and is, to this date, the only mandatory
program. To encourage dissemination and implementation of
the FUSE program, it has been translated into Spanish,
French, and Chinese [51]. Currently several surgical societies
around the world are considering adopting the FUSE pro-
gram for their country.


Conclusion
Passing the fundamentals programs means that participants
have shown the minimum competence required to perform
the procedures assessed in a safe manner. The final goal of
Chapter 33. Training for Quality: Fundamentals Program           631

the fundamentals program is to enhance patient safety and
improve education and quality.


References
 1. SAGES The Fundamentals of Laparoscopic Surgery.
 2. Choy I, Okrainec A. Fundamentals of laparoscopic surgery-­
    FLS. In: The SAGES manual of quality, outcomes and patient
    safety. Cham: Springer; 2012. p. 461–71.
 3. Cassera MA, Zheng B, Swanström LL. Data-based self-study
    guidelines for the fundamentals of laparoscopic surgery exami-
    nation. Surg Endosc. 2012;26:3426–9.
 4. Vassiliou MC, Dunkin BJ, Marks JM, Fried GM. FLS and FES:
    comprehensive models of training and assessment. Surg Clin
    North Am. 2010;90:535–58.
 5. Peters JH, Fried GM, Swanstrom LL, Soper NJ, Sillin LF,
    Schirmer B, Hoffman K, Committee SF. Development and
    validation of a comprehensive program of education and assess-
    ment of the basic fundamentals of laparoscopic surgery. Surgery.
    2004;135:21–7.
 6. Swanstrom LL, Fried GM, Hoffman KI, Soper NJ. Beta test
    results of a new system assessing competence in laparoscopic
    surgery. J Am Coll Surg. 2006;202:62–9.
 7. Fried GM, Feldman LS, Vassiliou MC, Fraser SA, Stanbridge D,
    Ghitulescu G, Andrew CG. Proving the value of simulation in
    laparoscopic surgery. Ann Surg. 2004;240:518.
 8. Ritter EM, Scott DJ. Design of a proficiency-based skills training
    curriculum for the fundamentals of laparoscopic surgery. Surg
    Innov. 2007;14:107–12.
 9. Scott DJ, Ritter EM, Tesfay ST, Pimentel EA, Nagji A, Fried
    GM. Certification pass rate of 100% for fundamentals of
    laparoscopic surgery skills after proficiency-based training. Surg
    Endosc. 2008;22:1887–93.
10. Hoops HE, Haley C, Kiraly LN, An E, Brasel KJ, Spight
    D. PGY-specific benchmarks improve resident performance
    on Fundamentals of Laparoscopic Surgery tasks. Am J Surg.
    2018;215:880–5.
11. Kishiki T, Lapin B, Tanaka R, Francis T, Hughes K, Carbray J,
    Ujiki MB. Goal setting results in improvement in surgical skills:
    a randomized controlled trial. Surgery. 2016;160:1028–37.
632    S. Valanci and G. M. Fried

12. Rosenthal ME, Ritter EM, Goova MT, Castellvi AO, Tesfay ST,
    Pimentel EA, Hartzler R, Scott DJ. Proficiency-based funda-
    mentals of laparoscopic surgery skills training results in durable
    performance improvement and a uniform certification pass rate.
    Surg Endosc. 2010;24:2453–7.
13. Stefanidis D, Korndorffer JR Jr, Markley S, Sierra R, Scott
    DJ. Proficiency maintenance: impact of ongoing s­imulator
    training on laparoscopic skill retention. J Am Coll Surg.
    2006;202:599–603.
14. Castellvi AO, Hollett LA, Minhajuddin A, Hogg DC, Tesfay ST,
    Scott DJ. Maintaining proficiency after fundamentals of lapa-
    roscopic surgery training: a 1-year analysis of skill retention for
    surgery residents. Surgery. 2009;146:387–93.
15. McCluney A, Vassiliou M, Kaneva P, Cao J, Stanbridge D,
    Feldman L, Fried G. FLS simulator performance predicts intra-
    operative laparoscopic skill. Surg Endosc. 2007;21:1991–5.
16. Sroka G, Feldman LS, Vassiliou MC, Kaneva PA, Fayez R, Fried
    GM. Fundamentals of laparoscopic surgery simulator train-
    ing to proficiency improves laparoscopic performance in the
    operating room—a randomized controlled trial. Am J Surg.
    2010;199:115–20.
17. Kang MJ, Apea-Kubi KB, Apea-Kubi KAK, Adoula N-G,
    Odonkor JNN, Ogoe AK. Establishing a sustainable training
    program for laparoscopy in resource-limited settings: experience
    in Ghana. Ann Glob Health. 2020;86:89.
18. Price R, Sergelen O, Unursaikhan C. Improving surgical care in
    Mongolia: a model for sustainable development. World J Surg.
    2013;37:1492–9.
19. Wells KM, Lee Y-J, Erdene S, Erdene S, Sanchin U, Sergelen O,
    Zhang C, Rodriguez BP, deVries CR, Price RR. Building opera-
    tive care capacity in a resource limited setting: the Mongolian
    model of the expansion of sustainable laparoscopic cholecystec-
    tomy. Surgery. 2016;160:509–17.
20. Vargas G, Price RR, Sergelen O, Lkhagvabayar B, Batcholuun P,
    Enkhamagalan T. A successful model for laparoscopic training
    in Mongolia. Int Surg. 2013;97:363–71.
21. Lombardo S, Rosenberg JS, Kim J, Erdene S, Sergelen O,
    Nellermoe J, Finlayson SR, Price RR. Cost and outcomes of
    open versus laparoscopic cholecystectomy in Mongolia. J Surg
    Res. 2018;229:186–91.
22. Laparoscopy Mongolia Model.
Chapter 33. Training for Quality: Fundamentals Program         633

23. Okrainec A, Henao O, Azzie G. Telesimulation: an effective
    method for teaching the fundamentals of laparoscopic surgery
    in resource-restricted countries. Surg Endosc. 2010;24:417–22.
24. Bedada AG, Hsiao M, Bakanisi B, Motsumi M, Azzie
    G. Establishing a contextually appropriate laparoscopic program
    in resource-restricted environments: experience in Botswana.
    Ann Surg. 2015;261:807–11.
25. Decker MR, Dodgion CM, Kwok AC, Hu Y-Y, Havlena JA,
    Jiang W, Lipsitz SR, Kent KC, Greenberg CC. Specialization
    and the current practices of general surgeons. J Am Coll Surg.
    2014;218:8–15.
26. Harris JD, Hosford CC, Sticca RP. A comprehensive analysis
    of surgical procedures in rural surgery practices. Am J Surg.
    2010;200:820–6.
27. Hazey JW, Marks JM, Mellinger JD, Trus TL, Chand B, Delaney
    CP, Dunkin BJ, Fanelli RD, Fried GM, Martinez JM. Why
    fundamentals of endoscopic surgery (FES)? Surg Endosc.
    2014;28(3):701–3. Springer.
28. Barsuk JH, Cohen ER, Feinglass J, McGaghie WC, Wayne
    DB. Residents’ procedural experience does not ensure compe-
    tence: a research synthesis. J Grad Med Educ. 2017;9:201–8.
29. Dunkin BJ. Fundamentals of endoscopic surgery. In: The
    SAGES manual of quality, outcomes and patient safety. Cham:
    Springer; 2012. p. 473–84.
30. American Board of Surgery.
31. Poulose BK, Vassiliou MC, Dunkin BJ, Mellinger JD, Fanelli
    RD, Martinez JM, Hazey JW, Sillin LF, Delaney CP, Velanovich
    V. Fundamentals of endoscopic surgery cognitive examination:
    development and validity evidence. Surg Endosc. 2014;28:631–8.
32. Mueller CL, Kaneva P, Fried GM, Mellinger JD, Marks JM,
    Dunkin BJ, Van Sickle K, Vassiliou MC. Validity evidence for a
    new portable, lower-cost platform for the fundamentals of endo-
    scopic surgery skills test. Surg Endosc. 2016;30:1107–12.
33. Gearhart S, Marohn M, Ngamruengphong S, Adrales G,
    Owodunni O, Duncan K, Petrusa E, Lipsett P. Development of
    a train-to-proficiency curriculum for the technical skills com-
    ponent of the fundamentals of endoscopic surgery exam. Surg
    Endosc. 2018;32:3070–5.
34. Vassiliou MC, Dunkin BJ, Fried GM, Mellinger JD, Trus T,
    Kaneva P, Lyons C, Korndorffer JR, Ujiki M, Velanovich
    V. Fundamentals of endoscopic surgery: creation and validation
    of the hands-on test. Surg Endosc. 2014;28:704–11.
634    S. Valanci and G. M. Fried

35. Lineberry M, Ritter EM. Psychometric properties of the
    Fundamentals of Endoscopic Surgery (FES) skills examination.
    Surg Endosc. 2017;31:5219–27.
36. Byrne RM, Hoops HE, Herzig DO, Diamond SJ, Lu KC, Brasel
    KJ, Tsikitis VL. Assessing the value of endoscopy simulator mod-
    ules designed to prepare residents for the ­fundamentals of endo-
    scopic surgery examination. Dis Colon Rectum. 2019;62:211–6.
37. Gardner AK, Ujiki MB, Dunkin BJ. Passing the fundamentals
    of endoscopic surgery (FES) exam: linking specialty choice and
    attitudes about endoscopic surgery to success. Surg Endosc.
    2018;32:225–8.
38. Hashimoto DA, Petrusa E, Phitayakorn R, Valle C, Casey B, Gee
    D. A proficiency-based virtual reality endoscopy curriculum
    improves performance on the fundamentals of endoscopic sur-
    gery examination. Surg Endosc. 2018;32:1397–404.
39. Mizota T, Anton NE, Huffman EM, Guzman MJ, Lane F, Choi
    JN, Stefanidis D. Development of a fundamentals of endoscopic
    surgery proficiency-based skills curriculum for general surgery
    residents. Surg Endosc. 2020;34:771–8.
40. Lineberry M, Park YS, Hennessy SA, Ritter EM. The
    Fundamentals of Endoscopic Surgery (FES) skills test: factors
    associated with first-attempt scores and pass rate. Surg Endosc.
    2020;34(8):3633–43.
41. Mueller C, Kaneva P, Fried G, Feldman L, Vassiliou
    M. Colonoscopy performance correlates with scores on the
    FES™ manual skills test. Surg Endosc. 2014;28:3081–5.
42. Feldman LS, Jones DB, Schwaitzberg SD. Fundamentals for use
    of safe energy. In: The SAGES manual of quality, outcomes and
    patient safety. Cham: Springer; 2012. p. 485–8.
43. Pollack SV, Carruthers A, Grekin RC. The history of electrosur-
    gery. Dermatol Surg. 2000;26:904–8.
44. ECR Institute. Top 10 health technology hazards for 2011; 2010.
    p. 12.
45. Nduka CC, Super PA, Monson J, Darzi AW. Cause and preven-
    tion of electrosurgical injuries in laparoscopy. J Am Coll Surg.
    1994;179:161–70.
46. Madani A, Jones DB, Fuchshuber P, Robinson TN, Feldman
    LS. Fundamental Use of Surgical Energy™(FUSE): a curricu-
    lum on surgical energy-based devices. New York: Springer; 2014.
47. Van der Voort M, Heijnsdijk E, Gouma D. Bowel injury as a
    complication of laparoscopy. Br J Surg. 2004;91:1253–8.
Chapter 33. Training for Quality: Fundamentals Program             635

48. Tucker RD. Laparoscopic electrosurgical injuries: survey results
    and their implications. Surg Laparosc Endosc. 1995;5:311–7.
49. Ha A, Richards C, Criman E, Piaggione J, Yheulon C, Lim
    R. The safe use of surgical energy devices by surgeons may be
    overestimated. Surg Endosc. 2018;32:3861–7.
50. Feldman LS, Fuchshuber P, Jones DB, Mischna J, Schwaitzberg
    SD. Surgeons don’t know what they don’t know about the safe
    use of energy in surgery. Surg Endosc. 2012;26:2735–9.
51. SAGES Fundamental Use of Surgical Energy.
52. Jones SB, Munro MG, Feldman LS, Robinson TN, Brunt LM,
    Schwaitzberg SD, Jones DB, Fuchshuber PR. Fundamental use
    of surgical energy (FUSE): an essential educational program for
    operating room safety. Perm J. 2017;21:16–050.
53. Madani A, Watanabe Y, Vassiliou MC, Fuchshuber P, Jones DB,
    Schwaitzberg SD, Fried GM, Feldman LS. Impact of a hands-
    ­on component on learning in the Fundamental Use of Surgical
     Energy™(FUSE) curriculum: a randomized-controlled trial in
     surgical trainees. Surg Endosc. 2014;28:2772–82.
54. Robinson TN, Olasky J, Young P, Feldman LS, Fuchshuber
     PR, Jones SB, Madani A, Brunt M, Mikami D, Jackson
     GP. Fundamental Use of Surgical Energy (FUSE) certification:
     validation and predictors of success. Surg Endosc. 2016;30:916–24.
55. Vizzielli G, Conte C, Romano M, Fagotti A, Costantini B, Lodoli
     C, Alletti SG, Gaballah K, Pacelli F, Ercoli A. Clinical impact
     of a surgical energy device in advanced ovarian cancer surgery
     including bowel resection. In Vivo. 2018;32:359–64.
56. Fuchshuber PR, Robinson TN, Feldman LS, Brunt LM, Madani
     A, Jones SB, Rozner MA, Munro MG, Mishna J, Schwaitzberg
     SD. Fundamental use of surgical energy (FUSE)–closing a gap
     in medical education. Ann Surg. 2015;262:20.
57. Jones DB, Brunt M, Feldman LS, Mikami DJ, Robinson TN,
     Jones SB. Safe energy use in the operating room. Curr Probl
     Surg. 2015;52:447–68.
Chapter 34
Training to Proficiency
Madhuri B. Nagaraj and Daniel J. Scott




Introduction
“See one, do one, teach one.” William Stewart Halsted, a
renowned surgeon and first chief of general surgery at Johns
Hopkins, was also the first to have created the surgical resi-
dency. His goal, with the mantra above, was to create a system
of learners who transformed into teachers allowing for a
formal self-sustaining training system for surgeons [1]. While
this ideology continues to be a guiding principle of modern
surgeons, many aspects of surgical training have evolved con-
siderably. The question now is twofold: (1) “how to train a
surgeon both efficiently and reliably to a desired level of
proficiency?”, (2) “how to maintain proficiency in practice?”



M. B. Nagaraj
University of Texas Southwestern, Department of Surgery,
Dallas, TX, USA
e-mail: madhuri.nagaraj@utsouthwestern.edu
D. J. Scott (*)
University of Texas Southwestern, Department of Surgery and
Simulation Center, Dallas, TX, USA
e-mail: daniel.scott@utsouthwestern.edu

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature   637
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_34
638   M. B. Nagaraj and D. J. Scott

The Historical Perspective
Until Halsted’s transformation of surgical education, the
majority of surgeons were born from an apprenticeship
model. Training would last anywhere from 5 to 7 years under
a single mentor starting at age 12 or 13 without any discrete
guidelines or educational objectives. Halsted, who drew from
his experience in Europe and particularly his German train-
ing, later came to America where he founded the first surgical
residency at Johns Hopkins University. His landmark address
in 1904 at Yale University documented the tenets of his train-
ing process including (1) intense supervised repetitive oppor-
tunities for care, (2) incorporation of basic science
understanding, and (3) complex training with graded respon-
sibility over time. His training methodology persisted for
decades until change began in the mid-twentieth century [2].
Various bodies such as the American Medical Association
(AMA) and American Board of Surgery (ABS) created the
Committee on Graduate Training in Surgery. In 1950 this led
to the formation of a Residency Review Committee in
Surgery (RRC-S), the first review committee in any specialty
to oversee the certification and accreditation of training pro-
grams. Finally, in 1982 the Accreditation Council for Graduate
Medical Education (ACGME) was established, and with it
came several changes in surgical education including the
restriction of work hours, and two decades later came the
focus on six required core competencies prior to graduation.
This also represented a shift to outcome-based practice – a
revolutionary aspiration to change training from time-based
graded independence to a focus on outcomes and compe-
tency as the basis for adequate training [3].
   Through all these organizational changes, the world of
surgery continued to adapt. Advancements in disease man-
agement and technological development (e.g., minimally
invasive surgery, novel devices, and robotic surgery) have
now expanded the expected knowledge base and requisite
skills immensely, creating new challenges for how to adapt
our training and evaluation processes. Gone now is the era of
                      Chapter 34. Training to Proficiency     639

purely apprenticeship training with solely intraoperative
learning, which became prohibitive due to cost and patient
safety concerns. Modern training now also consists of inani-
mate models, animal/cadaver training, and simulation train-
ing with validated benchmark assessments. These adjuncts
allow a trainee to gain dexterity both physically and mentally
with objectivity, but in a manner less constrained by time
limits and fixed operating room schedules.


Simulation as a Training Tool
Surgical simulation has lagged far behind military and avia-
tion technology, but has made substantial progress over the
past 30–40 years [4, 5]. The explosive growth of minimally
invasive surgery in the 1990s led to an increased demand for
skill acquisition [6, 7]. It was quickly recognized that using
operating room time to gain familiarity and practice with
these tools was expensive and time-consuming [8]. In
response, surgical educators began developing laparoscopic
simulators to foster the development and practice of skills
such as laparoscopic hand-eye coordination, depth percep-
tion, diminished tactile feedback, and restricted range of
motion [9–11]. For these novel training methods to gain
acceptance, it was pivotal to generate scientific proof that
simulation-based training resulted in improvements in opera-
tive ability, i.e., that skills were transferable to the operating
room environment. In 2000, Scott et al. performed the first
study documenting skill transferability where PGY2 and
PGY3 residents were randomized to 5 hours of basic laparo-
scopic skills training (box-trainer drills) compared to a
­control group that received only traditional clinical training.
 Using the validated Objective Structured Assessment of
 Technical Skills (OSATS) tool, raters blinded to the training
 group assignments detected a significant improvement in
 operative performance of the simulation-based training
 group during laparoscopic cholecystectomies performed on
 actual patients [9]. In 2002, Seymour et al. documented simi-
640   M. B. Nagaraj and D. J. Scott

lar evidence for a virtual reality (VR) training curriculum
[12]. In this study, 16 surgical residents PGY1–4 were evalu-
ated at baseline and then randomized to a VR training or
non-VR arm after which they performed a laparoscopic cho-
lecystectomy with independent review. This double-blinded,
randomized controlled trial showed that VR-trained resi-
dents operated 29% faster and made 6 times fewer errors
while non-VR-trained residents injured structures 5 times
more frequently and failed to make progress in dissection 9
times more frequently [12]. Numerous additional studies
were subsequently published; collectively these data helped
significantly advance the field [13–20].
   These revolutionary studies were paralleled by similar
efforts in the world of simulator-based endoscopy training.
Like laparoscopic surgery, training learners during actual
endoscopic procedures posed potential time and cost burdens
[21]. Early studies to promote the use of endoscopic simula-
tors showed promising results but were limited in their ability
to document skill transferability [22, 23]. Since then, prospec-
tive trials have shown that endoscopic simulation results in a
positive impact on technical skill acquisition as well as trans-
ferability to real patient care [24–26]. Thus, many carefully
performed studies have provided much-needed support
regarding the efficacy of simulation-based training for lapa-
roscopy and endoscopy training; in aggregate, this body of
evidence has helped simulation become a standard part of
proficiency-based training.


 erformance Goals for Training and Their
P
Impact
Early simulation training focused on a “one-size-fits-all”
approach. Arbitrary endpoints such a predetermined dura-
tion or number of repetitions were used out of convenience
and in hopes of ensuring adequate training. However, studies
showed that the rate of skill acquisition varied among train-
ees, even when the learners had similar prior surgical experi-
                     Chapter 34. Training to Proficiency     641

ence. Additional studies documented that some learners
required extended periods of training and their training
would be prematurely truncated due to endpoints that were
not linked to performance [27–30]. It became readily appar-
ent that using time or repetitions was not an ideal design for
curricula, as some individuals may require additional practice
whereas others may need less practice and therefore could
spend less time than required.
    A paradigm shift happened in 2002 when Seymour et al.
introduced the concept of proficiency-based training, which
allowed trainees to use as much time or repetitions as individu-
ally needed to achieve an expert-derived endpoint [12]. In this
study, residents assigned to VR training were required to prac-
tice until they reached a performance criterion derived from
four expert surgeons. This investigative team selected practic-
ing surgeons who were known to have the requisite skills in
laparoscopy, and these surgeons performed ten repetitions on
the VR trainer. Their mean performance was used as the pro-
ficiency level that resident trainees were required to achieve.
This curriculum proved feasible, with all residents completing
training; moreover, the time required was quite variable, rang-
ing from three to eight 1-hour sessions. As mentioned above,
this proficiency-based training resulted in significantly better
outcomes on actual patients during laparoscopic cholecystec-
tomy compared to the control group [12].
    Subsequently, this methodology was successfully applied
to other laparoscopic curricula (e.g., camera navigation,
suturing), box trainers, and VR simulators [6, 7, 16–19, 31, 32].
Following the introduction of Fundamentals of Laparoscopic
Surgery (FLS) in 2004, a proficiency-based curriculum was
developed and documented to result in a 100% pass rate on
the FLS technical skills examination; this curriculum became
adopted nationally and has been in use since that time [31,
32]. Similar proficiency-based curricula have since been
developed in robotics and endoscopy. Multiple papers cite
evidence for improved skill acquisition after the develop-
ment of proficiency-based robotic curricula [33–36]. One of
these entitled Fundamentals of Robotic Surgery (FRS) was a
642   M. B. Nagaraj and D. J. Scott

 large grant-funded initiative that accrued multi-institutional
 validity evidence [36]. Debates regarding training require-
 ments for endoscopy also fueled the development of robust
 endoscopic curricula [37, 38]. Proficiency-based endoscopic
 curricula have since been shown to have evidence of validity,
 be affordable, and increase skill acquisition in both upper and
 lower endoscopies [39–43]. Adoption of these curricula has
 further shown direct correlation to improved performance on
 the Fundamentals of Endoscopy Surgery (FES) examination
 [41, 43, 44]. Thus, as evidence grew for proficiency-based cur-
riculum development, it was soon being adopted into all
modalities of surgical training.
    It must be recognized that the responsibility of determin-
ing appropriate performance goals then is a vital part of cur-
riculum design. First, the metrics applied must be accurate.
While the original concept of construct validity remains rel-
evant, it is important to acknowledge that a newer framework
for validity science was introduced in 1999. This framework
states that validity is a unitary concept to describe the results
of a simulator, rather than the simulator itself. Therefore,
there may be various types of validity evidence, not types of
validity [45–47].
    According to early papers in surgical education, construct
validity refers to the “ability of an assessment method to
measure the trait it purports to measure” [48, 49]. For exam-
ple, a laparoscopic simulator should measure specific laparo-
scopic skills and not other factors, such as open surgical skills
or other unrelated domains of performance. Construct
­validity is often evaluated by discerning differences in tested
 individuals known to have varying levels of experience [34,
 48, 50–52]. When significant performance differences are
 detected between such groups, evidence is generated in sup-
 port of validity for the metrics used. For example, a study
 performed by Korndorffer in 2005 tested 142 different indi-
 viduals of varying laparoscopic experience – novice, interme-
 diate, and advanced – on the Southwestern video trainer and
 showed significant statistical differences in performance on
 5 various tasks [50]. This concept is fundamental to the use
                     Chapter 34. Training to Proficiency    643

of performance criteria as training endpoints since it is criti-
cal that an expert-derived score accurately reflects the level
of expertise that is desired. While some simulators may gen-
erate numerous metrics, especially for VR simulators, only a
subset of these metrics may be associated with construct
validity [53, 54].
   Once construct validity evidence is established for the
metrics being used, it is still important to tailor the perfor-
mance goals to the level of learners and the tasks involved.
For example, the FLS training curriculum documented con-
struct validity for all task metrics (time and errors) and used
performance levels derived from experts; the mean perfor-
mance was used for simple exercises (e.g., peg transfer), while
a slighter easier level (mean plus two standard deviations)
was used for more difficult tasks (e.g., intracorporeal knot
tying) to avoid learner frustration [55, 56]. It is important to
recognize that curricula should be designed for the learners
to meet an acceptable level of performance and not necessar-
ily the high level possessed by true experts. As Gallagher
et al. described, in their work they specifically defined
“expert” not as a group of physicians that were in the top
1–5% but rather as a representative sample of proficient sur-
geons [7].
   The concepts of reliability and fidelity are also relevant.
Reliability refers to the concept that metrics are reproducible
when assessments are performed by different proctors (inter-­
rater reliability) and when performed repeatedly (test-retest
reliability). Additionally, fidelity refers to the concept of how
much a simulator reflects reality [57–59]. Various laparo-
scopic trainers range from low-fidelity models such as the
simple box trainers to high-fidelity virtual reality models that
replicate entire procedures with realistic anatomical features.
Similarly, endoscopic trainers range from rudimentary-­
appearing models using tubes, boxes, targets, and foam all the
way to procedure-specific VR equipment with variations in
anatomy and pathology. Of note, despite the increased cost,
studies have shown no statistical advantage in skill acquisi-
tion for high-fidelity models [59, 60]. Both low- and high-­
644        M. B. Nagaraj and D. J. Scott

fidelity simulators have proven effective, and selection should
be based on the learning objectives [61–63].
   As we continue down this pathway of training to profi-
ciency, there is a new reform happening. Griswold-Theodorson
et al. used translational science criteria as a framework for
documenting outcomes following simulation-based mastery
learning (SBML), which is a more modern term for
proficiency-­based training [64–66]. This structure defines out-
comes by T1–T4 (Fig. 34.1). Historically, most studies docu-
mented T1 outcomes with improvement of skills measured in
the simulation environment, or T2 outcomes with improve-
ment of skills measured in the clinical environment.
Increasingly, there are studies that document improved T3
and T4 (patient and clinical) outcomes following SBML. In
fact, studies document improved patient comfort, operative
or procedural time, task success, and reduction in complica-
tion rates and cost in a variety of fields such as colonoscopy,


                   Translational science criteria for
                  simulation-based mastery learning


              •    Performance in simulation environment
      T1

              •    Performance in clinical environment
      T2

              •    Patient outcomes
      T3

              •    Cost outcomes
      T4


Figure 34.1 SMBL translation science criteria developed by
Dougherty and Conway and in 2008 and adapted by Griswold-
Theodorson et al. in 2015
                     Chapter 34. Training to Proficiency   645

central line insertion, and urologic procedures [64]. Specific
to laparoscopy, Zendejas et al. performed a single-blinded
randomized control trial with surgical residents performing a
laparoscopic total extraperitoneal (TEP) inguinal hernia
repair. Compared to a standard practice group, the SBML
group had statistically significant shorter operative times,
participated more as the operating surgeon, and had higher
performance scores on the Global Operative Assessment of
Laparoscopic Skills (GOALS) assessment, and their patients
had fewer overnight hospital stays [67].


Lessons from Psychology
The work of Ericsson revolutionized our understanding of
expert performance. He noted that traditional theories of
skill acquisition focused on an innate plateau of ability that
people reached after a certain time period of experience. He
also noted that a level of automation that makes intentional
change difficult tempers the amount of skill acquisition.
Instead, he proposed the theory of “deliberate practice.” In
extensive studies of experts in numerous fields – such as
music, sports, chess, and surgery – he identified the compo-
nents of training which were unique to experts who showed
consistent improvement in any given field [68]. From this
work, he determined that deliberate practice has three key
components: (1) learning well-defined tasks, (2) receiving
detailed immediate feedback, and (3) being afforded discrete,
focused opportunities for practice [68]. Part of this learning
process is breaking up tasks into smaller pieces, providing the
learner with an assessment of their baseline performance
level, setting expectations for a higher level of performance,
and coaching the learner to correct mistakes and achieve the
predetermined performance goals after ample practice. These
concepts make sense, as learners continuously push them-
selves to improve and avoid prematurely plateauing in their
level of performance.
646   M. B. Nagaraj and D. J. Scott

    Indeed, learners do best in acquiring new skills with guid-
ance as they are pushed outside of their comfort zone.
Conceptualized by psychologist Lev Vygotsky, the zone of
proximal development (ZPD) is the learning space that
occurs between two levels, which are benchmarked by what a
learner can do independently and what a learner cannot do
even with guidance (Fig. 34.2). Essentially, it states that learn-
ers do best when they are encouraged by a mentor to obtain
new skills that are beyond their current abilities but are not
so difficult as to be unachievable [69–71]. By steadily
­increasing their abilities, expert assistance can be tapered off
 (a concept known as scaffolding), and learners can work
 toward acquiring more complex skills [72–74]. By keeping
 learners in the area beyond their core abilities, this process
 results in a gradual increase in what learners can do
 independently.
    Additionally, having opportunities for practice over time is
 important. Distributed practice refers to acquiring skills over
 numerous sessions spread out over time. Compared to


                                      Learner cannot perform
                                      even with guidance

                                           Learner can perform
                                           with guidance (ZPD)


                                               Learner can
                                               perform unaided




Figure 34.2 The theory of Zone of Proximal Development (ZPD)
as developed by psychologist Lev Vygotsky
                     Chapter 34. Training to Proficiency    647

massed practice, where longer sessions are conducted in a
condensed fashion, distributed practice avoids mental and
physical fatigue and is associated with better initial skill
acquisition and long-term skill retention [75]. Moreover, con-
solidation occurs between practice sessions, allowing integra-
tion of concepts via neural processing for “more efficient and
faster retrieval and processing” and thereby improved skill
execution during subsequent practice sessions [76, 77].
Ultimately, repetitive, goal-oriented practice results in dimin-
ishing the attention resource capacity required to perform the
skill of interest (primary task), such that mental capacity is
available for other demands (secondary tasks) [78–80]. Many
of these lessons from psychology have been applied to surgi-
cal skill acquisition and substantially enhance the associated
learning opportunities, especially when using simulation.


I ntegrating Simulation into Residency
 Training
As recently as two decades ago, simulation-based training
and assessment did not have wide adoption in surgery. For
instance, a 2004 survey found that 55% of residency programs
had skills labs but only about half of these had required par-
ticipation [81]. FLS was one of the first national programs to
be introduced. The initial desire to create FLS began in the
1990s in parallel with the growth of laparoscopy and the sub-
sequent rise in simulation as a way to acquire skills in a safe
environment and measure proficiency. In 2004, the Society of
American Gastrointestinal and Endoscopic Surgeons
(SAGES) introduced the FLS program and subsequently
joined with the American College of Surgery (ACS) to over-
see the program [82]. The examination consists of two parts, a
written multiple-choice examination and a skills section
made up of five box-trainer tasks. Content validity was con-
firmed by finding that 11/14 (79%) of skills required for safe
operating as deemed by 44 content experts in the field of
648   M. B. Nagaraj and D. J. Scott

laparoscopic surgery were represented in these tasks [13].
Pass/fail thresholds were carefully determined by comparing
frequency distribution curves for participants known to be
competent or noncompetent based on their clinical experi-
ence [83]. Later studies showed that FLS score correlated
highly with the validated GOALS scale and was a predictor
of operative performance [56]. A proficiency-based curricu-
lum was developed then that allowed trainees self-practice in
a distributed fashion until expert-derived performance goals
were achieved; this curriculum was associated with a 100%
pass rate on the FLS technical skills examination [31, 55].
With the success of FLS and the need for a similar method of
training and assessment for endoscopy, SAGES developed
the FES program, which launched in 2010. Content experts
helped determine the skills components, validity testing was
undertaken, and the Global Assessment of Gastrointestinal
Endoscopic Skills (GAGES) tool was created [82, 84, 85].
Importantly, passing the FES examination correlated to satis-
factory performance in the clinical arena; specifically, a
GAGES colonoscopy score above 15 showed a significant
correlation to passing FES [43]. Given this strong validity
evidence, the ABS incorporated FLS and FES certification as
requirements for initial board certification in 2010 and 2014,
respectively [86]. Additionally, the American Board of
Obstetrics and Gynecology (ABOG) incorporated FLS certi-
fication as a requirement in 2020 [87].
   It is worth noting the considerable evolution of compe-
tency frameworks for graduate medical education shown
within this discussion. The ACGME introduced the six core
competencies in 1999, which are well known; of note, t­ echnical
skills were considered part of the patient care competency. In
2014, more granular milestones were widely adopted which
aimed to assess performance according to 16 subdomains of
the original competencies; a scale defining critical deficiency
and four levels of performance was used to afford a more
objective assessment of the learner [88, 89]. The education
                     Chapter 34. Training to Proficiency    649

community became quite excited about a potentially more
practical framework called entrustable professional activities
or EPAs [90]. In 2005, Dr. Olle Ten Cate first proposed the
adoption of these discrete proficiency achievements for
medical school and residency. He defined EPAs as “tasks or
responsibilities that can be entrusted to a trainee once suffi-
cient, specific competence is reached to allow for unsuper-
vised execution” [90]. Like the method of Halsted’s graded
independence and responsibility, he proposes that as compe-
tency is verified, graded independence can be given. The dif-
ference is rather than time and general concepts; his EPAs
reference discrete clinical practice with proficiency-­    based
assessments. And rather than replace competencies, an EPA
such as “the workup for right lower quadrant pain” incorpo-
rates a variety of competencies such as “communication,”
“focused physical examination,” and “differential formation,”
in addition to performing the appendectomy, managing com-
plications, and rendering postoperative care. Importantly,
EPAs rely on multiple assessments performed frequently by
numerous raters using discrete anchors, such that a robust
evaluation process is afforded. The expectation is that it
becomes readily apparent when a learner has sufficiently
mastered all judgment, knowledge, and skill aspects required
for a given clinical situation. Having gained traction in
numerous fields and in several countries, EPAs are now simi-
larly findings themselves incorporated into modern surgical
training. In 2018, the ABS created a pilot residency study with
28 programs and 5 core EPAs dealing with common clinical
situations [91, 92]. This has been paralleled by a concurrent
effort to implement EPAs in fellowship training through the
Fellowship Council (FC), which oversees the accreditation
process for Minimally Invasive Surgery, Bariatric,
Hepatopancreaticobiliary (HPB), Endoscopy, and other gas-
trointestinal surgical fellowships [6, 93]. Ultimately, incorpo-
rating EPAs into the assessment process may provide useful
verification of all competency aspects, including technical
skill performance in the clinical arena.
650    M. B. Nagaraj and D. J. Scott

Beyond Residency Training
While many efforts have been made to optimize graduate
medical education by incorporating proficiency-based train-
ing, arguably few meaningful programs exist for surgeons in
practice. It is well recognized that lifelong learning is critically
important to provide high-quality patient care. In keeping
with Ericsson’s model of deliberate practice, surgeons who do
not continuously push themselves to improve are at risk for
suboptimal performance. Importantly, sufficient data exist
which directly link patient outcomes to surgeon performance.
For example, in 2013, Birkmeyer et al. reported a landmark
study which documented outcomes following bariatric sur-
gery [94]. Each surgeon submitted a non-edited video of a
laparoscopic gastric bypass operation. Each video was then
edited to the critical portions of the operation and rated by
ten blinded peers using the validated OSATS instrument. The
technical skill ratings were correlated with surgeon-specific
patient outcomes from 10,343 operations obtained from a
statewide bariatric surgery registry. Out of the 20 surgeons
enrolled, 5 had video-based skill ratings in the lowest quartile.
Compared the other quartiles, this group’s skill rating corre-
lated with significantly higher frequency of complications,
mortality, reoperations, and readmissions and longer case
times [94]. Several other studies have since supported these
findings [95–100]. One of the most robust studies was pub-
lished in 2020 by Stulberg et al. and focused on the relation-
ship of surgeon skill according to video-based performance
during a laparoscopic right hemicolectomy and patient out-
comes from the National Surgical Quality Improvement
Program (NSQIP) database. In a 2-year span, the 17 surgeons
performed 1120 colectomies. These were reviewed by at least
ten peer reviewers and two expert raters and given a score of
up to five based on technical skills. Those with higher techni-
cal skills scores had a lower rate of complications, morbidity,
                      Chapter 34. Training to Proficiency     651

mortality, and unplanned reoperation. Furthermore technical
skill accounted for an impressive 25.8–27.5% of the variation
in complication rates after various operations [101].
    Given the growing awareness and evidence indicating that
surgeon performance has a direct impact on patient out-
comes, innovative national efforts have been developed to
implement proficiency training and verification in practice.
One of the most comprehensive frameworks is the SAGES
Masters Program [102]. This effort was conceptualized in
2014 and ambitiously aims to organize the wealth of educa-
tional resources within SAGES into discrete curricula for
eight content domains: acute care, biliary, bariatric, colorectal,
hernia, foregut, flexible endoscopy, and robotic surgery.
Within each domain, three levels of performance are identi-
fied and rely on the Dreyfus educational model: competency
(the level of a graduating resident or fellow), proficiency (the
level of a practicing surgeon early in their career), and mas-
tery (the level of an expert surgeon in practice for at least
several years). Each domain contains cognitive materials,
technical skill requirements, and anchoring procedures asso-
ciated with each level of performance. For example, a laparo-
scopic fundoplication is the anchoring procedure for the
foregut domain at the competency level. Essential to this
effort is the video-based assessment (VBA) program being
pursued by SAGES. Within the Masters Program, surgeons
who voluntarily enroll are required to submit a video docu-
menting their performance of the anchoring procedure to be
evaluated according to the VBA protocol. While this work is
still in development, substantial progress has been made in
both the overarching Masters Program and validation of the
VBA methodology [103, 104]. This work, employing novel
methods of coaching, has the potential to effectively provide
practicing surgeons with objective feedback on their perfor-
mance and ample opportunities for knowledge and skill
acquisition. It is expected that this framework will positively
impact patient outcomes.
652   M. B. Nagaraj and D. J. Scott

The Future of Proficiency Verification
Much of the groundwork that has been developed and is cur-
rently being pursued will likely be transformed further by
rapid advancements in technology to come. It is conceivable
that all operations will be video recorded in the near future
and linked to patient outcomes using automated algorithms.
One impressive advancement in this area is the black box
technology created by Teodor Grantcharov at the University
of Toronto [105]. After many years of development, a non-
profit university-based company, Surgical Safety Technologies,
launched installation of self-contained units within operating
rooms at multiple institutions (Surgical Safety Technologies
Inc., Toronto, ON, Canada). This system records not only
operative video footage but also audio feed and numerous
data from the operative environment, including patient vitals,
personnel interactions, and equipment usage. A variety of
analyses are then performed which include validated meth-
ods for surgeon performance assessment and measures of
operating room efficiency. Investigative teams examine data
for meaningful correlations to desired outcomes and itera-
tively incorporate these findings into their reports to facili-
tate quality improvement. For example, when analyzing 132
cases with the black box, 64% of cases showed evidence of at
least one type of cognitive distraction; there was an auditory
distraction once every 40 seconds, and errors occurred at a
median rate of 13 per hour although only approximately 5
per hour were detected [106]. Moreover, this group develops
automated algorithms to detect such events and the associ-
ated operating room factors. Indeed, there is much interest in
the surgical community regarding machine learning and the
use of artificial intelligence (AI). It is anticipated that such
technology may facilitate surgeon performance assessment in
a real-time fashion with targeted feedback provided through
the establishment of normative data sets and the identifica-
tion of specific areas for improvement. This technology may
even eventually facilitate the creation of AI systems designed
to aid surgeons intraoperatively. For example, the SAGES
                      Chapter 34. Training to Proficiency       653

Safe Cholecystectomy Program has highlighted the need for
surgeons to obtain a critical view of safety as part of their
strategy to minimize the risk of common bile duct injury
[107]. This group has documented the effectiveness of photo
and video documentation to verify the adequacy of obtaining
a critical view [108, 109]. In the future, AI systems may be
able to provide decision-making assistance in a real-time
fashion for anatomic identification during laparoscopic cho-
lecystectomy and many other procedures. Exciting work is
being pursued by the SAGES AI Task Force, and the team is
making progress in many of these areas [110]. Given these
extraordinary advancements, proficiency-based education is
expected to remain a core part of surgical training and
expand further into surgical practice.


References
 1. Kotsis SV, Chung KC. Application of the “see one, do one,
    teach one” concept in surgical training. Plast Reconstr Surg.
    2013;131(5):1194–201.
 2. Halstead WS. The training of the surgeon. Bull Johns Hopkins
    Hospital. 1904;xv:267–75.
 3. Polavarapu H, Kulaylat A, Sun S, Hamed O. 100 years of surgi-
    cal education: the past, present, and future. Bull Am Coll Surg.
    2013;98(7):22–7.
 4. Satava RM. Virtual reality surgical simulator. The first steps.
    Surg Endosc. 1993;7(3):203–5.
 5. Martin J, Regehr G, Reznick R, MacRae H, Murnaghan J,
    Hutchison C, Brown M. Objective structured assessment of
    technical skill (OSATS) for surgical residents. Br J Surg.
    1997;84:273–8.
 6. Scott DJ. Proficiency-based training for surgical skills. Semin
    Colon Rectal Surg. 2008;19(2):72–80.
 7. Gallagher AG, Ritter EM, Champion H, Higgins G, Fried MP,
    Moses G, Smith CD, Satava RM. Virtual reality simulation for
    the operating room: proficiency-based training as a paradigm
    shift in surgical skills training. Ann Surg. 2005;241(2):364–72.
 8. Bridges M, Diamond D. The financial impact of teaching surgical
    residents in the operating room. Am J Surg. 1999;177(1):28–32.
654   M. B. Nagaraj and D. J. Scott

 9. Scott D, Bergen P, Rege R, Laycock R, Tesfay S, Valentine RJ,
    Euhus D, Jeyarajah DR, Thompson W, Jones D. Laparoscopic
    training on bench models: better and more cost effective than
    operating room experience? J Am Coll Surg. 2000;191(3):272–83.
10. Rosser J, Rosser L, Savalgi R. Skill acquisition and assessment
    for laparoscopic surgery. Arch Surg. 1997;132(2):200–4.
11. Derossis A, Fried G, Abrahamowicz M, Sigman H, Barkun J,
    Meakins J. Development of a model for training and evaluation
    of laparoscopic skills. Am J Surg. 1998;175(6):482–7.
12. Seymour NE, Gallagher AG, Roman SA, O’Brien MK, Bansal
    VK, Andersen DK, Satava RM. Virtual reality training
    improves operating room performance: results of a randomized,
    double-blinded study. Ann Surg. 2002;236(4):458–63; discussion
    463–454.
13. Peters J, Fried G, Swanstrom L, Soper N, Sillin L, Schirmer B,
    Hoffman K, Committee TSF. Development and validation
    of a comprehensive program of education and assessment
    of the basic fundamentals of laparoscopic surgery. Surgery.
    2004;135(1):21–7.
14. Grantcharov T, Kristiansen V, Bendix J, Bardram L, Rosenberg
    J, Funch-Jensen P. Randomized clinical trial of virtual real-
    ity simulation for laparoscopic skills training. Br J Surg.
    2004;91(2):146–50.
15. Hamilton E, Scott D, Kapoor A, Nwariaku F, Bergen P, Rege
    R, Tesfay S, Jones D. Improving operative performance using a
    laparoscopic hernia simulator. Am J Surg. 2001;182(6):725–8.
16. Korndorffer J, Dunne B, Sierra R, Stefanidis D, Touchard C,
    Scott D. Simulator training for laparoscopic suturing using
    performance goals translates to the operating room. J Am Coll
    Surg. 2005;201(1):23–9.
17. Korndorffer J, Hayes D, Dunne JB, Sierra R, Touchard C,
    Markert R, Scott D. Development and transferability of a
    cost-effective laparoscopic camera navigation simulator. Surg
    Endosc. 2005;19:161–7.
18. Andreatta P, Woodrum D, Birkmeyer J, Yellamanchilli R,
    Doherty G, Gauger P, Minter R. Laparoscopic skills are
    improved with LapMentor™ training results of a randomized,
    double-blinded study. Ann Surg. 2006;243(6):854–63.
19. Ahlberg G, Enochsson L, Gallagher A, Hedman L, Hogman C,
    McClusky D III, Ramel S, Smith D, Arvidsson D. Proficiency-­
    based virtual reality training significantly reduces the error rate
    for residents during their first 10 laparoscopic cholecystecto-
    mies. Am J Surg. 2007;193(6):797–804.
                       Chapter 34. Training to Proficiency         655

20. Hyltander A, Lilijegren E, Rhodin P, Lonroth H. The transfer of
    basic skills learned in a laparoscopic simulator to the operating
    room. Surg Endosc. 2002;16:1324–8.
21. McCashland T, Brand R, Lyden E, de Garmo, P.a. The time
    and financial impact of training fellows in endoscopy. CORI
    research project. Clinical outcomes research initiative. Am J
    Gastroenterol. 2002;95(11):3129–32.
22. Ferlitsch A, Glauninger P, Gupper A, Schillinger M, Haefner
    M, Gangl A, Schoefl R. Evaluation of a virtual endoscopy
    simulator for training in gastrointestinal endoscopy. Endoscopy.
    2002;34(9):698–702.
23. Moorthy K, Munz Y, Jiwanji M, Bann S, Chang A, Darzi
    A. Validity and reliability of a virtual reality upper gastrointes-
    tinal simulator and cross validation using structured assessment
    of individual performance with video playback. Surg Endosc.
    2004;18(2):328–33.
24. Cohen J, Cohen S, Vora K, Xue Xi, Burdick JS, Bank S, Bini EJ,
    Bodenheimer H, Cerulli M, Gerdes H, Greenwald D, Gress F,
    Grosman I, Hawes R, Mullin G, Schnoll-Sussman F, Starpoli
    A, Stevens P, Tenner S, Villanueva G. Multicenter, randomized,
    controlled trial of virtual-reality simulator training in acqui-
    sition of competency in colonoscopy. Gastrointest Endosc.
    2006;64(3):361–8.
25. Hochberger J, Matthes K, Maiss J, Koebnick C, Hahn E, Cohen
    J. Training with the compact EASIE biologic endoscopy
    simulator significantly improves hemostatic technical skill of
    gastroenterology fellows: a randomized controlled comparison
    with clinical endoscopy training alone. Gastrointest Endosc.
    2005;61(2):204–15.
26. Gerson L. Evidence-based assessment of endoscopic simulators
    for training. Gastrointest Endosc Clin N Am. 2006;16:489–509.
27. Brunner WC, Korndorffer JR Jr, Sierra R, Massarweh NN,
    Dunne JB, Yau CL, Scott DJ. Laparoscopic virtual reality train-
    ing: are 30 repetitions enough? J Surg Res. 2004;122(2):150–6.
28. Scott D, Young W, Tesfay S, Frawley W, Rege R, Jones
    D. Laparoscopic skills training. Am J Surg. 2001;181(2):137–42.
29. Brunner W, Korndorffer J, Sierra R, Dunne JB, Yau CL, Corsetti
    R, Slakey D, Townsend M, Scott D. Determining standards
    for laparoscopic proficiency using virtual reality. Am Surg.
    2005;71(1):29–35.
656   M. B. Nagaraj and D. J. Scott

30. Korndorffer J, Scott D, Sierra R, Brunner W, Dunne JB, Slakey
    D, Townsend M, Hewitt R. Developing and testing competency
    levels for laparoscopic skills training. JAMA. 2005;140(1):80–4.
31. Scott D, Ritter EM, Tesfy S, Pimentel E, Nagji A, Fried
    G. Certification pass rate of 100% for fundamentals of lapa-
    roscopic surgery skills after proficiency-based training. Surg
    Endosc. 2008;22(8):1887–93.
32. Satava R, Gallagher A, Pellegrini C. Surgical competence and
    surgical proficiency: definitions, taxonomy, and metrics. J Am
    Coll Surg. 2003;196(6):933–7.
33. Dulan D, Rege R, Hogg D, Gilberg-Fisher K, Arain N, Tesfay S,
    Scott D. Developing a comprehensive, proficiency-based train-
    ing program for robotic surgery. Surgery. 2012;152(3):477–88.
34. Dulan G, Rege R, Hogg D, Gilberg-Fisher K, Arain N, Tesfay
    S, Scott D. Proficiency-based training for robotic surgery: con-
    struct validity, workload, and expert levels for nine inanimate
    exercises. Surg Endosc. 2012;26(6):1516–21.
35. Martin J, Stefanidis D, Dorin R, Goh A, Satava R, Levy
    J. Demonstrating the effectiveness of the fundamentals of
    robotic surgery (FRS) curriculum on the RobotiX mentor vir-
    tual reality simulation platform. J Robot Surg. 2020. https://doi.
    org/10.1007/s11701-­020-­0 1085-­4.
36. Satava R, Stefanidis D, Levy J, Smith R, Martin J, Monfared S,
    Timsina L, Darzi AW, Moglia A, Brand T, Dorin R, Dumon K,
    Francone T, Georgiou E, Goh A, Marcet J, Martino M, Sudan R,
    Vale J, Gallagher A. Proving the effectiveness of the fundamen-
    tals of robotic surgery (FRS) skills curriculum: a single-blinded,
    multispecialty, multi-institutional randomized control trial. Ann
    Surg. 2019;272(2):384–92.
37. Bittner J, Coverdill J, Imam T, Deladisma A, Edwards M,
    Mellinger J. Do increased training requirements in gastroin-
    testinal endoscopy and advanced laparoscopy necessitate a
    paradigm shift? A survey of program directors in surgery. J Surg
    Educ. 2008;65(6):418–30.
38. Vassiliou M, Kaneva P, Poulose B, Dunkin B, Marks J, Sadik R,
    Sroka G, Anvari M, Thaler K, Adrales G, Hazey J, Lightdale J,
    Velanovich V, Swanstrom L, Mellinger J, Fried G. How should
    we establish the clinical case numbers required to achieve pro-
    ficiency in flexible endoscopy? Am J Surg. 2010;191(1):121–5.
39. Van Sickle K, Buck L, Willis R, Mangram A, Truitt M, Shabahang
    M, Thomas S, Trombetta L, Dunkin B, Scott D. A multicenter,
    simulation-based skills training collaborative using shared
                      Chapter 34. Training to Proficiency        657

    GI Mentor II systems: results from the Texas Association of
    Surgical Skills Laboratories (TASSL) flexible endoscopy cur-
    riculum. Surg Endosc. 2011;25(9):2980–6.
40. Weis J, Grubbs J, Scott D, Abdelfattah K, Abdelnaby A, Farr
    D, Hennessy S. Are we better off than we were 4 years ago?
    Measuring the impact of the ABS flexible endoscopy curricu-
    lum. Surg Endosc. 2020;34(9):4110–4.
41. Guzzetta A, Weis J, Hennessy S, Willis R, Wilcox V Jr, Dunkin
    B, Hogg D, Scott D. Proficiency-based preparation signifi-
    cantly improves FES certification performance. Surg Endosc.
    2018;32(11):4451–7.
42. Ritter EM, Taylor Z, Wold K, Franklin B, Placek S, Korndorffer
    J, Gardner A. Simulation-based mastery learning for endos-
    copy using the endoscopy training system: a strategy to
    improve endoscopic skills and prepare for the fundamentals
    of endoscopic surgery (FES) manual skills exam. Surg Endosc.
    2018;32(1):413–20.
43. Mueller C, Kaneva P, Fried G, Feldman L, Vassiliou
    M. Colonoscopy performance correlates with scores on the
    FES™ manual skills test. Surg Endosc. 2014;28(11):3081–5.
44. Weis J, Scott D, Busato L, Hennessy S. FES exam outcomes in
    year two of a proficiency-based endoscopic skills curriculum.
    Surg Endosc. 2020;34(3):961–6.
45. Korndorffer J, Kasten S, Downing S. A call for the utilization of
    consensus standards in the surgical education literature. Am J
    Surg. 2010;199(1):99–104.
46. Kane M. Validation. In: Educational measurement. New York:
    American Council on Education and Greenwood; 2006.
    p. 17–64.
47. Testing, J.C.o.S.f.E.a.P., APA, A.E.R.A.a.N.C.o., Education,
    M.i. The standards for educational and psychological testing.
    Washington, DC: APA; 1999.
48. Winckel C, Reznick R, Cohen R, Taylor B. Reliability and con-
    struct validity of a structured technical skills assessment form.
    Am J Surg. 1994;167(4):423–7.
49. Cohen R, Reznick R, Taylor B, Provan J, Rothma A. Reliability
    and validity of the objective structured clinical examination in
    assessing surgical residents. Am J Surg. 1990;160(3):302–5.
50. Korndorffer JR Jr, Clayton JL, Tesfay ST, Brunner WC,
    Sierra R, Dunne JB, Jones DB, Rege RV, Touchard CL, Scott
    DJ. Multicenter construct validity for southwestern laparo-
    scopic videotrainer stations. J Surg Res. 2005;128(1):114–9.
658   M. B. Nagaraj and D. J. Scott

51. McDougall EM, Corica FA, Boker JR, Sala LG, Stoliar G, Borin
    JF, Chu FT, Clayman RV. Construct validity testing of a laparo-
    scopic surgical simulator. J Am Coll Surg. 2006;202(5):779–87.
52. Woodrum DT, Andreatta PB, Yellamanchilli RK, Feryus L,
    Gauger PG, Minter RM. Construct validity of the LapSim lapa-
    roscopic surgical simulator. Am J Surg. 2006;191(1):28–32.
53. Koch A, Buzink S, Heemskerk J, Botden S, Veenendaal R,
    Jakimowicz J, Schoon E. Expert and construct validity of the
    Simbionix GI Mentor II endoscopy simulator for colonoscopy.
    Surg Endosc. 2008;22(1):158–62.
54. Duffy A, Hoghle N, McCarthy H, Lew J, Egan A, Christos P,
    Fowler D. Construct validity for the LAPSIM laparoscopic sur-
    gical simulator. Surg Endosc. 2005;19:401–5.
55. Ritter EM, Scott D. Design of a proficiency-based skills training
    curriculum for the fundamentals of laparoscopic surgery. Surg
    Innov. 2007;14(2):107–12.
56. Fried G, Feldman L, Vassiliou M, Fraser S, Stanbridge D,
    Ghitulescu G, Andrew C. Proving the value of simulation in
    laparoscopic surgery. Ann Surg. 2004;240(3):518–25.
57. Alessi S. Fidelity in the design of instructional simulations. J
    Comput Based Instruct. 1988;15(2):40–7.
58. Brydges R, Carnahan H, Rose D, Rose L, Dubrowski
    A. Coordinating progressive levels of simulation fidelity to
    maximize educational benefit. Acad Med. 2010;85(5):806–12.
59. Lefor AK, Harada K, Kawahira H, Mitsuishi M. The effect of
    simulator fidelity on procedure skill training: a literature review.
    Int J Med Educ. 2020;11:97–106.
60. Nguyen T, Braga LH, Hoogenes J, Matsumoto ED. Commercial
    video laparoscopic trainers versus less expensive, simple lapa-
    roscopic trainers: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Urol.
    2013;190(3):894–9.
61. Ritter EM, Lineberry M, Hashimoto D, Gee D, Guzzetta A, Scott
    D, Gardner A. Simulation-based mastery learning significantly
    reduces gender differences on the fundamentals of endoscopic
    surgery performance exam. Surg Endosc. 2018;32:5006–11.
62. Preisler L, Svendsen M, Nerup N, Svendsen L, Konge
    L. Simulation-based training for colonoscopy. Establishing cri-
    teria for competency. Medicine. 2015;94(4):e440.
63. Wilcox V Jr, Trus T, Salas N, Martinez J, Dunkin B. A proficiency-­
    based skills training curriculum for the SAGES surgical train-
    ing for endoscopic proficiency (STEP) program. J Surg Educ.
    2014;71(3):282–8.
                       Chapter 34. Training to Proficiency        659

64. Griswold-Theodorson S, Ponnuru S, Dong C, Szyld D, Reed T,
    McGaghie W. Beyond the simulation laboratory: a realist syn-
    thesis review of clinical outcomes of simulation-based mastery
    learning. Acad Med. 2015;90(11):1553–60.
65. McGaghie W, Barsuk J, Wayne D. Comprehensive healthcare
    simulation: mastery learning in health professions education.
    Evanston: Springer Nature; 2020.
66. Dougherty D, Conway P. The “3Ts” road map to transform US
    health care. J Am Med Assoc. 2008;299:2319–21.
67. Zendejas B, Cook D, Bingener J, Huebner M, Dunn W, Sarr M,
    Farley D. Simulation-based mastery learning improves patient
    outcomes in laparoscopic inguinal hernia repair: a randomized
    controlled trial. Ann Surg. 2011;254(3):502–9.
68. Ericsson KA. Deliberate practice and the acquisition and
    maintenance of expert performance in medicine and related
    domains. Acad Med. 2004;79(10 Suppl):S70–81.
69. Vygotsky L. Mind in society: the development of higher psycho-
    logical processes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press;
    1978.
70. Burkitt E. Zone of proximal development. In: Encyclopaedic
    dictionary of psychology; 2006.
71. Zone of proximal development. In: Penguin dictionary of psy-
    chology; 2009.
72. Wells G. Dialogic inquiry: towards a sociocultural practice
    and theory of education. Learning in doing: social, cognitive
    and computational perspectives. Jessup: Cambridge University
    Press; 1999.
73. Wood D, Bruner J, Ross G. The role of tutoring in problem solv-
    ing. J Child Psychol Psychiatry. 1976;17:89–100.
74. Kurt S. Vygotsky’s zone of proximal development and scaffold-
    ing. 2020. https://educationaltechnology.net/vygotskys-­zone-­of-­
    proximal-­development-­and-­scaffolding/. Accessed 28 Aug 2020.
75. Moulton C-A, Dubrowski A, MacRae H, Graham B, Grober
    E, Reznick R. Teaching surgical skills: what kind of practice
    makes perfect? A randomized, controlled. Trial Ann Surg.
    2006;244(3):400–9.
76. Ericsson KA, Charness N, Hoffman R, Feltovich P. Consolidation
    and integration. In: Ericsson KA, Charness N, Hoffman R,
    Feltovich P, editors. The Cambridge handbook of expertise and
    expert performance. New York: Cambridge University Press;
    2006. p. 180–1.
660   M. B. Nagaraj and D. J. Scott

77. Brashers-Krug T, Shadmehr R, Bizzi E. Consolidation in human
    motor memory. Nature. 1996;382(6588):252–5.
78. Stefanidis D, Scerbo M, Sechrist C, Mostafavi A, Heniford
    BT. Do novices display automaticity during simulator training?
    Am J Surg. 2008;195(2):210–3.
79. Stefanidis D, Scerbo M, Korndorffer J, Scott D. Redefining
    simulator proficiency using automaticity theory. Am J Surg.
    2007;193(4):502–6.
80. Meneghetti A, Pachev G, Zheng B, Panton O, Qayumi
    K. Objective assessment of laparoscopic skills: dual-task
    approach. Surg Innov. 2012;19(4):452–9.
81. Korndorffer J, Stefanidis D, Scott D. Laparoscopic skills labo-
    ratories: current assessment and a call for resident training
    standards. Am J Surg. 2006;191(1):17–22.
82. Vassiliou M, Dunkin B, Marks J, Fried G. FLS and FES: com-
    prehensive models of training and assessment. Surg Clin N Am.
    2010;90(3):535–58.
83. Fraser S, Klassen D, Feldman L, Ghitulescu G, Stanbridge D,
    Fried G. Evaluating laparoscopic skills: setting the pass/fail
    score for the MISTELS system. Surg Endosc. 2003;17(6):964–7.
84. Vassiliou M, Kaneva P, Poulose B, Dunkin B, Marks J, Sadik R,
    Sroka G, Anvari M, Thaler K, Adrales G, Hazey J, Lightdale J,
    Velanovich V, Swanstrom L, Mellinger J, Fried G. Global assess-
    ment of gastrointestinal endoscopic skills (GAGES): a valid
    measurement tool for technical skills in flexible endoscopy.
    Surg Endosc. 2010;24:1834–41.
85. Vassiliou M, Dunkin B, Fried G, Mellinger J, Trus T, Kaneva
    P, Lyons C, Korndorffer J, Ujiki M, Velanovich V, Kochman
    M, Tsuda S, Martinez J, Scott D, Korus G, Park A, Marks
    J. Fundamentals of endoscopic surgery: creation and validation
    of the hands-on test. Surg Endosc. 2014;28(3):704–11.
86. Training requirements. https://www.absurgery.org/default.
    jsp?certgsqe_training. Accessed 2 Sept 2020.
87. Brissman I. ABOG announces new eligibility requirement
    for board certification. 2018. https://www.flsprogram.org/
    news/abog-­a nnounces-­n ew-­e ligibility-­r equirement-­b oard-­
    certification/. Accessed 2 Sept 2020.
88. Nasca T, Philibert I, Brigham T, Flynn T. The next GME
    accreditation system — rationale and benefits. N Engl J Med.
    2012;366:1051–6.
89. Cogbill TH, Swing SR. Development of the educational mile-
    stones for surgery. J Grad Med Educ. 2014;6(1):317–9.
                       Chapter 34. Training to Proficiency        661

 90. Ten Cate O. Competency-based education, entrustable profes-
     sional activities, and the power of language. J Grad Med Educ.
     2013;5(1):6–7.
 91. Englander R, Flynn T, Call S, Carraccio C, Cleary L, Fulton
     TB, Garrity MJ, Lieberman SA, Lindeman B, Lypson ML,
     Minter RM, Rosenfield J, Thomas J, Wilson MC, Aschenbrener
     CA. Toward defining the foundation of the MD degree: core
     entrustable professional activities for entering residency. Acad
     Med. 2016;91(10):1352–8.
 92. Lindeman B, Petrusa E, Phitayakorn R. Entrustable profes-
     sional activities (EPAs) and applications to surgical training.
     Resources in Surgical Education; 2017.
 93. Scott D. About the fellowship council: creating a bright future
     for fellowship training. 2018. https://fellowshipcouncil.org/
     about/. Accessed 8 Jul 2020.
 94. Birkmeyer JD, Finks JF, O’Reilly A, Oerline M, Carlin AM, Nunn
     AR, Dimick J, Banerjee M, Birkmeyer NJ, Michigan Bariatric
     Surgery Collaborative. Surgical skill and complication rates
     after bariatric surgery. N Engl J Med. 2013;369(15):1434–42.
 95. Keller DS, Delaney CP, Hashemi L, Haas EM. A national evalu-
     ation of clinical and economic outcomes in open versus laparo-
     scopic colorectal surgery. Surg Endosc. 2016;30(10):4220–8.
 96. Archampong D, Borowski D, Wille-Jørgensen P, Iversen
     L. Workload and surgeon’s specialty for outcome after
     colorectal cancer surgery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
     2012;14(3):CD005391.
 97. Hall BL, Huffman KM, Hamilton BH, Paruch JL, Zhou
     L, Richards KE, Cohen ME, Ko CY. Profiling individual
     surgeon performance using information from a high-quality
     clinical registry: opportunities and limitations. J Am Coll Surg.
     2015;221(5):901–13.
 98. Quinn CM, Bilimoria KY, Chung JW, Ko CY, Cohen ME,
     Stulberg JJ. Creating individual surgeon performance assess-
     ments in a statewide hospital surgical quality improvement
     collaborative. J Am Coll Surg. 2018;227(3):303–12.
 99. Varban OA, Greenberg CC, Schram J, Ghaferi AA, Thumma
     JR, Carlin AM, Dimick JB, Collaborative MBS. Surgical skill in
     bariatric surgery: does skill in one procedure predict outcomes
     for another? Surgery. 2016;160(5):1172–81.
100.Fecso AB, Szasz P, Kerezov G, Grantcharov TP. The effect of
     technical performance on patient outcomes in surgery: a sys-
     tematic review. Ann Surg. 2017;265(3):492–501.
662    M. B. Nagaraj and D. J. Scott

101. Stulberg JJ, Huang R, Kreutzer L, Ban K, Champagne BJ,
     Steele SE, Johnson JK, Holl JL, Greenberg CC, Bilimoria
     KY. Association between surgeon technical skills and patient
     outcomes. JAMA. 2020;155(10):960–8.
102.Jones DB, Stefanidis D, Korndorffer JR Jr, Dimick JB, Jacob BP,
     Schultz L, Scott DJ. SAGES University MASTERS program:
     a structured curriculum for deliberate, lifelong learning. Surg
     Endosc. 2017;31(8):3061–71.
103.Feldman LS, Pryor AD, Gardner AK, Dunkin BJ, Schultz L,
     Awad MM, Ritter EM. SAGES video-based assessment (VBA)
     program: a vision for life-long learning for surgeons. Surg
     Endosc. 2020;34(8):3285–8.
104.Ritter EM, Gardner AK, Dunkin BJ, Schultz L, Pryor AD,
     Feldman L. Video-based assessment for laparoscopic fundo-
     plication: initial development of a robust tool for operative
     performance assessment. Surg Endosc. 2020;34(7):3176–83.
105.Goldenberg MG, Jung J, Grantcharov TP. Using data to enhance
     performance and improve quality and safety in surgery. JAMA.
     2017;152(10):972–3.
106.Jung J, Juni P, Lebovic G, Grantcharov T. First-year analysis of the
     operating room black box study. Ann Surg. 2020;271(1):122–7.
107. The SAGES Safe Cholecystectomy Program. Strategies for
     minimizing bile duct injuries: adopting a universal culture
     of safety in cholecystectomy. https://www.sages.org/safe-­
     cholecystectomy-­program/. Accessed 10 Sept 2020.
108.Mascagni P, Fiorillo C, Urade T, Emre T, Yu T, Wakabayashi T,
     Felli E, Perretta S, Swanstrom L, Mutter D, Marescaux J, Pessaux
     P, Costamagna G, Padoy N, Dallemagne B. Formalizing video
     documentation of the critical view of safety in laparoscopic
     cholecystectomy: a step towards artificial intelligence assistance
     to improve surgical safety. Surg Endosc. 2020;34:2709–14.
109.Tokuyasu T, Iwashita Y, Matsunobu Y, Kamiyama T, Ishikake
     M, Sakaguchi S, Ebe K, Tada K, Endo Y, Etoh T, Nakashima M,
     Inomata M. Development of an artificial intelligence system
     using deep learning to indicate anatomical landmarks during
     laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Surg Endosc. 2020. https://doi.
     org/10.1007/s00464-­020-­07548-­x.
110.Hashimoto DA, Rosman G, Rus D, Meireles OR. Artificial
     intelligence in surgery: promises and perils. Ann Surg.
     2018;268(1):70–6.
Chapter 35
The Critical View
of Safety: Creating
Procedural Safety
Benchmarks
William C. Sherrill III and L. Michael Brunt




Introduction and Background
Laparoscopic cholecystectomy (LC) remains one of the most
common procedures performed by surgeons in the United
States. According to recent literature, an estimated 750,000–
1000,000 cholecystectomies are completed on an annual
basis [1]. In 2010 it was estimated that 90% of these proce-
dures were performed laparoscopically, and this percentage
has only continued to increase as it has become gold standard
treatment for treatment of biliary gallstone disease [2].
Though this change initially came with improvement in cos-
metics, hospital stay, decreased pain scores, and increased
patient satisfaction, there was the unintended consequence of
an increase in bile duct injuries (BDIs) [3]. Several studies


W. C. Sherrill III · L. M. Brunt (*)
Department of Surgery and Section of Minimally Invasive Surgery,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA
e-mail: bruntm@wustl.edu

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature   663
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_35
664   W. C. Sherrill III and L. M. Brunt

published in the 1990s showed laparoscopic associated BDI
rates higher than the reported rate of 0.1–0.2% from open
cholecystectomies [4].
   With increased training and experience, these numbers
appear to have trended downward. However, the incidence
may be underreported since most studies from the United
States use administrative coding data, where the estimated
incidence of major BDI ranged between 0.15% and 0.4% [5,
6]. One study of large payor claims database that looked at
319,184 patients who underwent a cholecystectomy between
2011 and 2014 found that the rate of BDI had plateaued and
remained at 0.23% in the patient populations examined [5].
Despite the low incidence of BDI overall, given the fre-
quency with which this procedure is performed, it is esti-
mated that approximately 2300–3000 injuries occur in the
United States annually [6].
   In 2014, the Society of American Gastrointestinal and
Endoscopic Surgeons (SAGES) formed the Safe
Cholecystectomy Task Force with the goal to enhance a univer-
sal culture of safety around cholecystectomy to reduce the
incidence of bile duct injuries. Using a Delphi consensus pro-
cess, this group established a six-step program for safe cholecys-
tectomy [7] and developed a series of educational modules on
this topic. More recently, a multi-society consensus conference
was held sponsored by SAGES, the Americas Hepato-­
Pancreato-­  Biliary Association, the International Hepato-
Pancreato-Biliary Association, the Society for Surgery of the
Alimentary Tract, and the European Association for Endoscopic
Surgery, and guidelines were subsequently published that
addressed 18 key questions around reduction of BDI [6]. This
review will discuss both the six-step program and will highlight
some of the consensus guideline recommendations.


SAGES Six-Step Program
The SAGES six-step program comprises procedural strate-
gies from the SAGES safe cholecystectomy initiative that
surgeons can employ to enhance the safe performance of
      Chapter 35.   The Critical View of Safety: Creating…    665

cholecystectomy and reduce the risk of bile duct injury. There
should be few barriers for surgeons to embrace these steps
once they understand the principles and rationale behind
these as reviewed below.

• Step 1. Use the critical view of safety (cvs) method of iden-
  tification of the cystic duct and cystic artery during laparo-
  scopic cholecystectomy [8]

    The critical view of safety was first described in 1995 as a
protective method against misidentification of the cystic
artery and cystic duct [9]. In order to obtain the CVS, meticu-
lous dissection along with appropriate traction must be
applied to isolate the two cystic structures. The first criterion
required is the removal of fat and fibrous tissue from the
hepatocystic triangle. This step is carried out with a combina-
tion of blunt dissection and electrosurgical energy per the
surgeon’s preference. The hepatocystic triangle is bordered by
the cystic duct laterally, the common hepatic duct medially,
and the inferior edge of the liver. Of note, exposure of the
common hepatic duct and common bile duct is not a part of
the CVS, and one should not attempt to do so, although these
can, in many cases, be seen without any added dissection.
Regardless, one should always maintain vigilance and aware-
ness of their possible location.
    The second criterion of the CVS is separation of the lower
one-third of gallbladder from the liver to expose the cystic
plate. This component of the CVS is based on the principles
of safety in open cholecystectomy where the cystic duct and
artery were isolated, and then the gallbladder was completely
disconnected from the liver bed before these structures were
ligated and divided [8]. With laparoscopic cholecystectomy, it
is technically challenging to completely disconnect the gall-
bladder, so separating the lower 1/3 of the gallbladder is used
instead. This step is critically important to minimize the risk
of injuring aberrant anatomy of the right hepatic duct or
artery, to avoid misidentification of the cystic duct for the bile
duct in the initial part of the dissection, and to prevent clip-
666    W. C. Sherrill III and L. M. Brunt

ping or division of the bile duct of hepatic duct. The sequence
of the dissection to achieve this step of the CVS is shown in
Fig. 35.1.
   Completing components one and two of the CVS allows
for greater lateral retraction of the gallbladder neck which
helps to expose the cystic duct from the gallbladder, and
allows for a more complete and safe dissection. The final cri-
terion is to ensure that only two individual structures (cystic
artery and cystic duct) are seen entering the gallbladder as
shown in Fig. 35.2.
   In some cases, more than two structures can be seen, which
is due to the presence of an anterior and posterior cystic
artery with early bifurcation. In such cases, it should be pos-
sible to trace the artery branches well up onto the gallblad-
der. However, this should raise one’s awareness to ensure the
dissection was not being carried out too low and an addi-
tional unintended structure has become involved.


 a                                  b




 c                                  d




Figure 35.1 (a) Small window between cystic duct and artery; (b)
initial window between cystic artery and liver bed; (c), further open-
ing of the cystic plate; (d), completion of separation of 1/3 of lower
GB off the liver bed
      Chapter 35.   The Critical View of Safety: Creating…   667


 a                               b




Figure 35.2 Completion of the CVS with doublet photographic
documentation from the anterior (a) and posterior (b) perspective

   The consensus guidelines examined whether use of the
CVS can help mitigate the risk of bile duct injuries. To date
there have been no controlled, randomized control trials to
support the usage of CVS over any other methods of identi-
fication as such a study would require more than 10,000
patients and would be too costly and impractical to perform.
The panel did perform a retrospective pooled BDI incidence
analysis when comparing studies that use the CVS versus the
infundibular identification technique and found an incidence
of 2 in one million cases when the CVS was used versus 1.5
BDIs in 1000 cases when it was not [6]. Additionally, the
guideline panel also reviewed multiple single-institutional
case series which found that when BDIs occurred, they were
in cases in which the CVS was not obtained [10]. As a result,
the panel made a strong recommendation for use of the CVS
as the preferred method of ductal identification.
   Incorporation of proper education on the critical view
safety and its components are essential for its ­implementation
into daily practice. A study performed at Thomas Jefferson
University of 43 general surgery residents examined the
impact of proper education in this regard [11]. All surgical
residents were required to attend a comprehensive education
course on preforming safe cholecystectomy. Fifty-­one cases
were recorded pre-education, and another 50 cases were
recorded post-education. The videos from the resident cases
were given a CVS score ranging from 1 to 6 using the
Sanford-Strasberg scoring method [12]. Pre-intervention, the
668   W. C. Sherrill III and L. M. Brunt

average CVS score was 2.3, which dramatically increased to a
mean of 4.3 after the educational intervention. Furthermore,
the number of procedures that were found to have a CVS
score ≥4 increased from 15.7% to 52%.
   The guideline panel also investigated whether the usage of
CVS coaching of surgeons limited the risk or severity of
BDI. Though the quality of evidence was low, in a study in
which ten practicing surgeons submitted intraoperative vid-
eos, it was found that only 20% obtained the CVS prior to
clipping any structures [13]. After the surgeons received
coaching about the CVS, a measurable increase in their CVS
scores from 1.75 to 3.75 was seen. These studies suggest that
both practicing surgeons and trainees have an incomplete
understanding of the CVS or ability to clearly demonstrate it
via video and that directed educational interventions can
improve its attainment.

• Step 2. understand the potential for aberrant anatomy in all
  cases

   The majority of biliary injuries are a result of misidentifi-
cation of anatomy, mistaking the common bile duct for the
cystic duct; this risk is increased in the setting of aberrant
anatomy [9]. The most common biliary abnormalities involve
a short cystic duct or a deviation in the normal insertion of
the cystic duct into the common hepatic duct. Additionally,
the other common anomaly is an aberrant right hepatic duct
or right posterior sectoral duct onto which the cystic duct
may insert and which may run very proximate to the hepato-
cystic triangle (Fig. 35.3). Cholangiography may be useful in
helping identify an aberrant duct and, thereby, avoiding
injury.
   A recent study from Natsume and colleagues examined
1289 patients in which they reviewed MR cholangiography
for both thickening of the gallbladder wall and aberrant
anatomy and compared the incidence of bile duct injury [14].
They found that aberrant anatomy was an independent pre-
dictor for possible BDI with an OR of 10.96. Radiological
     Chapter 35.   The Critical View of Safety: Creating…   669




Figure 35.3 Cholangiogram demonstrating aberrant anatomy with
cystic duct that enters the right hepatic duct

studies have also examined the incidence of cystic duct varia-
tion. One study that examined MRCPs in 198 patients, a
normal lateral insertion of the cystic duct into the middle
third of the common hepatic duct occurred in only 51% of
cases [15].
   Mastering biliary anatomy should consist of not only
operative findings but also preoperative and intraoperative
imaging. Aberrant biliary anatomy may be seen on imaging
tests such as ERCP which if done should always be reviewed
preoperatively by the surgeon, and abnormal arterial anat-
omy may be occasionally seen on preoperative CT scans
(done more commonly in patients with acute cholecystitis).
Recognition of aberrant ducts on intraoperative cholangiog-
670   W. C. Sherrill III and L. M. Brunt

raphy or other intraoperative imaging modalities (ultrasound,
near-infrared cholangiography) is also an essential skill that
all surgeons should have in their armamentarium.

• Step 3. make liberal usage of cholangiography or other
  methods to image the biliary tree intraoperatively.

    The consensus guideline panel examined the use of intra-
operative cholangiography (IOC) vs no IOC in mitigating the
risk of BDI. Fourteen studies were pooled by the panel for a
combination of 2.5 million patients to look into the benefit of
IOC in mitigation of bile duct injury [6]. Overall the pooled
data showed a reduced incidence of BDI when using IOC
with an OR 0.78 and when risk-adjusted an OR of 0.81, both
which were found to be statistically significant [6]. In a study
from the Swedish Gallriks inpatient registry database that
examined the rate of BDI, out of the 152,776 cholecystecto-
mies performed, a total of 613 BDIs were reported [16].
Overall, IOC was used in 94,569 of these patients and showed
a 34% risk reduction in BDI when compared to no IOC. Also
from the Gallriks database, in patients with acute cholecysti-
tis (AC) or a history of acute cholecystitis, IOC use was asso-
ciated with a reduced risk of BDI OR 0.59 (95% CI 0.30–0.63)
and OR 0.59 (95% CI 0.35–1.00), respectively [17]. An asso-
ciation was not found in patients who did not have AC of a
history of AC (OR 1.06, 95% CI 0.75–1.49). Given these find-
ings, the consensus panel recommended liberal usage of intra-
operative cholangiography in patients with acute cholecystitis
(AC) or with a history of AC to help decrease the risk of BDI
[6]. Due to the uncertainty of the evidence, no recommenda-
tion was made regarding IOC for LC in elective non-acute
cholecystitis. However, surgeons should consider other fac-
tors that may favor the use of IOC including a history of
abnormal liver function tests, gallstone pancreatitis, a difficult
dissection, or history of prior gastric bypass, which would
make subsequent ERCP challenging.
    Additionally, the panel made a strong recommendation
that surgeons incorporate intraoperative biliary imaging in
      Chapter 35.   The Critical View of Safety: Creating…   671

the setting of an uncertain biliary anatomy or if there is a
concern for a possible BDI. A meta-analysis was performed
using 8 independent studies that included a total of 1256
BDIs and compared the usage of IOC or not [6]. The usage of
IOC was associated with increased operative recognition of
BDI with an OR of 2.92 when compared to no IOC.
   Other intraoperative imaging modalities: Laparoscopic
intraoperative ultrasound (LUS) has not been as extensively
studied when compared to IOC. One meta-analysis that com-
pared usage of LUS versus IOC for successful visualization of
biliary anatomy demonstrated similar rates of ductal identifi-
cation [18]. Recently, near-infrared (NIR) light technology
has been investigated as an adjunct for ductal identification
use during cholecystectomy. A prospective, randomized trial
reported by Dip et al. compared the detection rate for biliary
anatomy using white light (N = 318) vs white light plus NIR
cholangiography (N = 321) during LC [19]. The seven biliary
structures examined were the cystic duct, right hepatic duct,
common hepatic duct, common bile duct, cystic common bile
duct junction, cystic gallbladder junction, and accessory bile
ducts, before and after surgical dissection. Detection rates of
these structures were found to be statistically higher in the
NIR group when compared to the white light group prior to
any surgical dissection with an OR ranging from 2.3 to 3.6.
Similar results were found after dissection excluding the com-
mon duct and cystic common bile duct junction. Two patients
from the study sustained “mild” biliary duct injuries, both in
the white light group. Currently a second randomized control
trial (FALCON Trial, NCT02558556) is underway that com-
pares NIR to white light with results pending.
   As a result of the Dip study, the consensus panel recom-
mended that the use of NIR imaging may be considered as an
adjunct to white light alone for identification of biliary anat-
omy during cholecystectomy [6]. This was a conditional rec-
ommendation with a very low certainty of evidence. No
recommendation was made in regard to use of NIR vs IOC
because of insufficient evidence to answer the question. It is
important to note that the panel emphasized that NIR should
672   W. C. Sherrill III and L. M. Brunt

not be a substitute for a complete dissection and identifica-
tion of the critical view of safety.

• Step 4. Consider an intraoperative momentary pause prior
  to clipping, cutting, or transecting any ductal structures

   As a general operating room safety measure, the use of a
time-out prior to starting the case has been implemented
broadly to reduce wrong site surgery and surgical errors and
to enhance communication between team members. The
original Step 4 of the safe chole program used the term “time-­
out” before clipping or cutting ductal structures. The guide-
line panel included this question in its deliberations, but at
the consensus meeting, there was considerable pushback
from both the expert panel and surgeons in attendance
because of the potential medicolegal implications of the term
“time-out.” As a result, the recommendation was revised and
subsequently approved that “as a best practice, it is suggested
that surgeons conduct a momentary pause before clipping/
cutting the cystic duct and cystic artery.” The purpose of this
recommendation is to serve as a stop point for the surgeon to
step back, pause, and verify that the anatomy is correct and
that an adequate CVS has been obtained before committing
to clipping and dividing the critical structures. This approach
may help mitigate against the heuristic unconscious assump-
tions that can occur with visual perception [20]; it should be
easy to integrate into each operation, does not involve any
significant delay, and requires minimal additional effort.
   Another question addressed by the panel was whether two
surgeons versus one surgeon should be considered to lower
the risk of BDI. Ultimately, no literature was found to
address this question, and it would be impractical to apply in
many practice settings. Nonetheless, in cases in which there is
difficulty with the dissection, a lack of progression, or uncer-
tainty of anatomy, intraoperative consultation with a surgical
colleague or a hepatobiliary surgeon (a second set of eyes)
where feasible should be considered.
     Chapter 35.   The Critical View of Safety: Creating…   673

   Since the intraoperative physical presence of an additional
surgeon is not as easily established, Sobba et al. at Wake
Forest University investigated the usage of a secure multime-
dia message system (MMS) to grade intraoperative CVS
images [21]. In this study, 193 laparoscopic cholecystectomies
were performed which involved 14 surgeons. Once the oper-
ating team had “obtained” the CVS, both anterior and poste-
rior images of it were taken and sent via MMS for grading by
another surgeon remotely. The average response time was
found to be under 5 min, and images were graded on a scale
of 0–6. The authors suggested that this approach could be
used for providing real time for feedback of achievement of
the CVS to surgeons during the course of an operation. While
there were a number of limitations of the study, this is valid
proof of concept for having a second surgeon to evaluate and
validate the CVS without having to be physically present in
the operating room.
   An area of controversy in the use of the CVS is to whether
to obtain photo documentation of it. This question was
addressed by the guideline panel, but no recommendation
was made because of concerns regarding feasibility, accept-
ability, and medicolegal implications. It should be noted that
the accuracy of documentation of obtaining the CVS with
operative notes is generally poor. For surgeons who choose to
document, doublet photographs (of the anterior and poste-
rior views) are considered to be superior to single photo-
graphs, as described by Sanford et al. [12]. Video is also
generally superior to still photographic documentation. Each
surgeon should consider their own practice and, alternatively,
whether photo documentation may be utilized as a quality
improvement measure across their hospital.
   Another potentially intriguing application to enhancing
operative safety is artificial intelligence (AI) and machine
learning which are being studied across the field of medicine.
Though this is not ready for implementation to evaluate the
critical view of safety, studies have begun to address this
around laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Tokuyasu and colleagues
674   W. C. Sherrill III and L. M. Brunt

looked at artificial intelligence for identification of surgical
landmarks during laparoscopic cholecystectomy [22]. In their
study, the cystic duct, common bile duct, lower edge of the left
medial liver segment, and Rouviere’s sulcus were selected.
After a learning period, the computer software was tested
using 23 unique images. The software was able to successfully
determine all 4 landmarks in 22 of 23 cases after being con-
firmed with 2 expert surgeons. Future applications of AI could
include verifying identification of the CVS and/or areas of
potential danger for the dissection. Madani et al. recently ana-
lyzed 308 LC videos and was able to segment them into safe
(GO) and dangerous (NO GO) zones using AI following
expert annotation with a high degree of reliability [23].

• Step 5. Recognize when the dissection is approaching a zone
  of significant risk, and halt the dissection before entering
  that zone. The operation should be finished by a safe
  method other than cholecystectomy if conditions around
  the gallbladder are too dangerous.

   A number of preoperative risk factors have been identi-
fied that are associated with increased difficulty of cholecys-
tectomy. Accordingly, the guideline panel asked the question
whether surgical risk/complexity stratification should be
done or not prior to undertaking cholecystectomy. For refer-
ence, the two most commonly used models for acute chole-
cystitis (AC) are the Tokyo guidelines and the American
Association for the Surgery of Trauma (AAST) severity grad-
ing classification [24, 25]. The Tokyo guidelines were recently
updated in 2018 (TG 18). Although there were limitations in
the evidence in the literature, it was felt that since more
severe grades of cholecystitis are associated with greater risk
of BDI, that utilization of a risk stratification system could
potentially mitigate the risk of BDI. TG 18 goes an additional
step by providing a recommend algorithm for the care of each
grade of AC. Both the TG 13 and TG 18 produced strong
evidence to suggest that the risk of BDI increased with the
severity of inflammation. A summary of the T18 and AAST
grading classifications is shown in Table 35.1.
      Chapter 35.   The Critical View of Safety: Creating…            675

Table 35.1 Grading classification systems for acute cholecystitis
Tokyo
grade     Criteria
I         1. Local signs of inflammation (Murphy sign, right
              upper quadrant mass/pain/tenderness)
          2. Systemic signs of inflammation (fever, elevated CRP
              and/or WBC)
          3. Imaging findings consistent with acute cholecystitis
          4. Absence of Grade II or II criteria
II        Elevated WBC >18,000/mm3
          Palpable tender RUQ mass
          Symptom duration >72 h
          Marked local inflammation (gangrenous or
          emphysematous cholecystitis, peri-cholecystic abscess,
          biliary peritonitis)
III       Dysfunction of cardiovascular (hypotension on
          pressors), neurological (altered LOC), respiratory
          (PaO2/FiO2 < 300), renal (oliguria, Cr > 2.0), hepatic
          (INR > 1.5), or hematologic (Plts <100,000/mm3)
          systems
AAST      Description (imaging/operative)
grade
I         Localized gallbladder inflammation, wall thickening,
          peri-cholecystic fluid
II        Distended gallbladder with purulence or hydrops,
          necrosis/gangrene of wall without perforation/air in GB
          wall or biliary tree
III       Perforation with bile localized to RUQ
IV        Peri-cholecystic abscess, bilioenteric fistula, gallstone
          ileus
V         Grade IV disease but with generalized peritonitis/free
          intraperitoneal fluid
Modified from Yokoe et al. [25] and Hernandez et al. [35]
CRP C-reactive protein, WBC white blood cell count, LOC loss of
consciousness, Cr creatinine, Plts platelets
676   W. C. Sherrill III and L. M. Brunt

   For patients who present with TG Grade I AC, the panel
recommended surgical intervention within 72 h of symptom
onset [6]. No recommendations were made in regard to tim-
ing of surgery for those with TG II or Grade III AC because
the evidence was insufficient. The TG 18 guidelines also sup-
port surgical intervention for Grade I acute cholecystitis;
however, advise antibiotics and medical management for
those with Grade II and Grade III without emergent surgical
indications [25].
   A 2016 case-control study performed by Tornqvist et al.
[26] examined data from all iatrogenic bile duct injuries
within the Swedish inpatient registry, and compared these to
a control group from the same registry who underwent
uneventful cholecystectomy. Patients with TG 1 AC did not
have an increased risk of bile duct injury (OR 0.96); however,
patients with TG Grade II AC had over double the risk of
BDI (OR 2.41), and those with Tokyo Grade III had almost
eight times increased odds of BDI (OR 8.43). Overall, the
adjusted risk of BDI was almost double in patients with mod-
erate to severe AC (OR 1.97). Additionally, as stated previ-
ously, the use of intraoperative cholangiography reduced
BDI injury risk by 52% (OR 0.48).
   In addition to acute cholecystitis, it is important to recog-
nize other risk factors that portend a more difficult gallblad-
der. In one literature review of 91 studies that included a total
of 324,553 patients, several risk factors were identified as
shown in Table 35.2 [27]. Strasberg has described the pres-
ence of biliary inflammatory fusion when there is severe
fibrosis and contraction in the area of the hepatocystic trian-
gle [28]. This situation poses an increased risk of injury and
should lead to consideration of a bailout option.
   A number of different bailout techniques have been
described for when dissection of the gallbladder, specifically
the hepatocystic triangle, becomes too difficult due to severe
inflammation or other factors. They include the fundus-first
approach (top-down) and subtotal cholecystectomy, either by
the fenestrating or reconstituting technique [29]. No direct
randomized control trial has been performed to compare
      Chapter 35.      The Critical View of Safety: Creating…   677

Table 35.2 Risk factors for difficult cholecystectomy
Male gender                         Increased age
Chronic cholecystitis with          Obesity
fibrosis
Liver cirrhosis                     Previous upper abdominal
                                    surgery
Emergent cholecystectomy            Cystic duct stones
Hepatomegaly                        Biliary malignancy
Bilioenteric fistula                Anatomic abnormalities
Inexperience


these two techniques and their impact on BDI. However, it
was the opinion of the guideline panel that avoiding entry
into the hepatocystic triangle would be preferable in such
cases, which would be more readily accomplished by subtotal
cholecystectomy than a top-down approach. Moreover, the
top-down approach has been associated with severe vascular-­
biliary injuries [30].
    Subtotal cholecystectomy may be performed either lapa-
roscopically or open depending on the surgeon’s experience
instead of attempting a total cholecystectomy. A fenestrating
subtotal cholecystectomy is generally preferred over the
reconstituting type in order to avoid a remnant gallbladder.
In the uncommon situation in which the neck of the gallblad-
der cannot be exposed, one should consider placement of a
surgical cholecystostomy tube in the fundus of the gallblad-
der and abort attempts at further dissection. Oftentimes,
open cholecystectomy has been the preferred bailout option.
It should be noted, however, that biliary injuries may still
occur after conversion of a laparoscopic to open procedure
[31], and most recent surgical graduates and trainees have
little operative experience with difficult open
cholecystectomies.

• Step 6. Get help from another surgeon (when the dissection
  or conditions are difficult).
678   W. C. Sherrill III and L. M. Brunt

   As previously discussed, engagement of another surgeon
can be extremely valuable when there is difficulty with the
dissection and lack of progression, and especially if there is
concern that a complication or biliary injury has occurred.
There is some evidence in the literature to support the notion
that more experienced surgeons have a lower rate of BDI. A
2014 observational study examined 52,632 LCs from an insur-
ance claims database which was linked to surgeons who had
completed the Fundamental of Laparoscopic Surgery course
or not [32]. Overall, they found that more experienced sur-
geons (20.7 mean years in practice) had a significantly lower
BDI rate (0.14%) compared to less experienced surgeons (6.1
mean years in practice) who had a BDI rate of 0.47%. The
recommendation on this issue by the guideline panel was
conditional due to concerns regarding feasibility and accept-
ability, especially in smaller hospitals with limited surgical
support. One strategy in such cases would be telephone or
video consultation with a senior or HPB surgeon in a referral
center when local expertise is not available.


Importance of Avoiding BDI
Although BDI is not the most common complication after
LC, it is the most common consequential complication.
Compared to the initial intended procedure that is typically
outpatient with an expected rapid recovery and full return to
health, it is highly morbid; requires additional surgical, radio-
logic, and endoscopic interventions; significantly increases
the cost of care; is associated with a several-fold increase in
mortality rate; and often results in medicolegal consequences.
Bile duct injury is, in fact, the most common reason for
­litigation against general surgeons. Further interventions can
 occur over weeks to months leading to a significant harm to
 the patient’s quality of life (QOL) and trust in the healthcare
 system.
      Chapter 35.   The Critical View of Safety: Creating…   679

   Multiple studies in regard to quality of life (QOL) after
BDI have been performed. Some show no differences, while
others show significant differences in multiple realms. Halbert
et al. investigated the long-term outcomes of patients with
common bile duct injury following surgical treatment for
cholelithiasis between 2005 and 2010 in a New York State
administrative database [33]. Of 156,958 LCs, 125 patients
with CBD injuries were identified with follow-up ranging
from 4 to 9 years. They found that all-cause mortality was
approximately 20.8% with a mean time to death of 1.64 years
for those who required operative intervention. They deter-
mined that patients who sustained injuries had an increase of
8.8% above the cohort’s expected age-adjusted death rate.
   Despite the potential consequences of a BDI, outcomes
have improved over the years in regard to success of surgical
treatment. In a combined analysis between Indiana University
and the Massachusetts General Hospital, a multidisciplinary
team managed a total of 528 patients over an 18-year period
[34]. Outcomes were examined from patients with all types of
Strasberg level injuries. The vast majority of bile leaks, Type
A, were managed by endoscopic interventions alone (96%).
The other bile duct injuries were managed by a multidisci-
plinary team of interventional endoscopists (40%), experi-
enced HPB surgeons (36%), and interventional radiologists
(24%). The success rates were highest for surgery at 88% and
lowest for interventional radiology at 50%. They also found
that the subset of patients with surgery in more recent years
had an even higher overall success rate of 95%.
   The issue of who should manage a BDI when it occurs was
also addressed at the consensus conference. A strong recom-
mendation was made that the patient be referred promptly to
a surgeon with experience in biliary reconstruction and to a
center with a hepatobiliary multidisciplinary team [6]. One
must also consider that when a BDI does occur, the ­emotional
and psychologic impact on the surgeon can be considerable,
and the importance of having an independent perspective
cannot be overstated.
680   W. C. Sherrill III and L. M. Brunt

Implementation Considerations
Overall, the six steps listed above provide procedural guid-
ance to enhance the safety of cholecystectomy with evidence
to support each step. None of these has significant associated
barriers to implementation (with the exception in some cen-
ters of obtaining direct intraoperative help) beyond lack of
education, awareness, and acceptance. Unfortunately, nation-
wide standardization is difficult due to the varying circum-
stances and situations surgeons may face, meaning resources
at a large tertiary care center with multiple surgeons will not
be the same as a solo surgeon practicing in a rural setting.
   Our aim here is to offer awareness of different approaches
and techniques in order to achieve these six steps. Greater
detail is available in the SAGES safe cholecystectomy mod-
ules which are available on line at http://fesdidactic.org/. We
also recommend that the consensus conference guideline be
read in depth by all surgeons who perform cholecystectomy
to understand both the panel recommendations and the
rationale and justification behind each of these principles [6].
We strongly believe that adherence to these principles, and, in
particular, to use of the critical view of safety on every case
and altering to a bailout option when the CVS cannot be
safely obtained, has the greatest potential to lower BDI rates.


Future Directions
The final recommendation from the consensus meeting was
that national initiatives should be undertaken for prevention
of BDI and tracking of outcomes [6]. Studies to date have
been limited by the lack of a system in the United States for
monitoring the incidence and severity of BDIs. Instead, data
are obtained mostly from administrative insurance claims-­
type databases, which inherently lack the details for accu-
rately measuring not only the incidence but also the underlying
circumstances under which BDI occurs.
      Chapter 35.   The Critical View of Safety: Creating…      681

   One strategy going forward would be to develop ICD
codes along with procedural codes to specifically register
when a BDI occurred, categorize it by standardized approach
(e.g., Strasberg classification), and determine interventions
required for management. Unlike NSQIP which measures
30-day outcomes, longer-term results would need to be a part
of any such system (minimum 1-year outcomes). A collective
effort that involved multiple surgical societies and engaged
regulatory and payor systems in the United States would
likely be needed to accomplish this goal.
   Additionally, the creation of regional and nationally recog-
nized institutions for BDI injury repair would provide an
avenue for fast-tracking of referrals and transfers of patients
to facilities where there is expertise in management. As
stated previously, high-volume surgeons and hospital systems
have better outcomes for BDI repair, and this approach could
help lower the morbidity and mortality of BDI when it
occurs.
   The ultimate goal should be to push the incidence of BDI
to as close to zero as possible. We believe this can be accom-
plished through awareness of guidelines, careful and meticu-
lous surgical approaches, and enhanced education for
surgeons at all levels, starting with trainees throughout our
general surgery residency programs.


References
1. Duncan CB, Riall TS. Evidence-based current surgical practice:
   calculous gallbladder disease. J Gastrointest Surg. 2012;16:2011–
   25. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11605-­0 12-­2024-­1.
2. Csikesz NG, Singla A, Murphy MM, Tseng JF, Shah SA. Surgeon
   volume metrics in laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Dig Dis Sci.
   2010;55:2398–405. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10620-­0 09-­1035-­6.
3. Archer SB, Brown DW, Smith CD, Branum GD, Hunter JG. Bile
   duct injury during laparoscopic cholecystectomy: a prospective
   nationwide series. J Am Coll Surg. 1997;184:571–8.
682    W. C. Sherrill III and L. M. Brunt

 4. Roslyn JJ, Binns GS, Hughes EFX, Saunders-Kirkwood K,
    Zinner MJ, et al. Open cholecystectomy: a contemporary analy-
    sis of 42,474 patients. Ann Surg. 1993;218:129–37. https://doi.
    org/10.1097/00000658-­199308000-­0 0003.
 5. Barrett M, Asbun HJ, Chien HL, Brunt LM, Telem DA. Bile
    duct injury and morbidity following cholecystectomy: a need
    for improvement. Surg Endosc. 2018;32:1683–8. https://doi.
    org/10.1007/s00464-­0 17-­5847-­8.
 6. Brunt LM, Deziel DJ, Telem DA, Strasberg SM, Aggarwal R,
    et al. Safe cholecystectomy multi-society practice guideline and
    state of the art consensus conference on prevention of bile duct
    injury during cholecystectomy. Ann Surg. 2020;272:3–23. https://
    doi.org/10.1097/SLA.0000000000003791.
 7. Pucher PH, Brunt LM, Fanelli RD, Asbun HJ, Aggarwal
    R. SAGES expert Delphi consensus: critical factors for safe
    surgical practice in laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Surg Endosc.
    2015;29:3074–85. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00464-­0 15-­4079-­z.
 8. Strasberg SM, Brunt M. Rationale and use of the critical view
    of safety in laparoscopic cholecystectomy. 2010. https://doi.
    org/10.1016/j.jamcollsurg.2010.02.053.
 9. Strasberg SM, Hertl M, Soper NJ. An analysis of the problem of
    biliary injury during laparoscopic cholecystectomy. J Am Coll
    Surg. 1995;180:101–25.
10. Booij KAC, De Reuver PR, Nijsse B, Busch ORC, Van Gulik
    TM, et al. Insufficient safety measures reported in opera-
    tion notes of complicated laparoscopic cholecystectomies.
    Surg (United States). 2014;155:384–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
    surg.2013.10.010.
11. Chen CB, Palazzo F, Doane SM, Winter JM, Lavu H, et al.
    Increasing resident utilization and recognition of the critical
    view of safety during laparoscopic cholecystectomy: a pilot study
    from an academic medical center. Surg Endosc. 2017;31:1627–35.
    https://doi.org/10.1007/s00464-­0 16-­5150-­0.
12. Sanford DE, Strasberg SM. A simple effective method for
    generation of a permanent record of the critical view of safety
    during laparoscopic cholecystectomy by intraoperative “dou-
    blet” photography. J Am Coll Surg. 2014;218:170–8. https://doi.
    org/10.1016/j.jamcollsurg.2013.11.003.
13. Stefanidis D, Chintalapudi N, Anderson-Montoya B, Oommen B,
    Tobben D, et al. How often do surgeons obtain the critical view
    of safety during laparoscopic cholecystectomy? Surg Endosc.
    2017;31:142–6. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00464-­0 16-­4943-­5.
      Chapter 35.   The Critical View of Safety: Creating…       683

14. Natsume S, Kato T, Hiramatsu K, Shibata Y, Yoshihara M, et al.
    Presence of aberrant anatomy is an independent predictor of
    bile duct injury during cholecystectomy. Int Surg. 2017;102:250–7.
    https://doi.org/10.9738/INTSURG-­D-­15-­0 0049.
15. Sarawagi R, Sundar S, Gupta SK, Raghuwanshi S. Anatomical
    variations of cystic ducts in magnetic resonance cholangio-
    pancreatography and clinical implications. Radiol Res Pract.
    2016;2016:1–6. https://doi.org/10.1155/2016/3021484.
16. Waage A, Nilsson M. Iatrogenic bile duct injury: a population-­
    based study of 152 776 cholecystectomies in the Swedish
    inpatient registry. Arch Surg. 2006;141:1207–13. https://doi.
    org/10.1001/archsurg.141.12.1207.
17. Törnqvist B, Strömberg C, Akre O, Enochsson L, Nilsson
    M. Selective intraoperative cholangiography and risk of bile
    duct injury during cholecystectomy. Br J Surg. 2015;102:952–8.
    https://doi.org/10.1002/bjs.9832.
18. Aziz O, Ashrafian H, Jones C, Harling L, Kumar S, et al.
    Laparoscopic ultrasonography versus intra-operative cholan-
    giogram for the detection of common bile duct stones during
    laparoscopic cholecystectomy: a meta-analysis of diagnostic
    accuracy. Int J Surg. 2014;12:712–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
    ijsu.2014.05.038.
19. Dip F, LoMenzo E, Sarotto L, Phillips E, Todeschini H, et al.
    Randomized trial of near-infrared incisionless fluorescent chol-
    angiography. Ann Surg. 2019;270:992–9. https://doi.org/10.1097/
    SLA.0000000000003178.
20. Way LW, Stewart L, Gantert W, Liu K, Lee CM, et al. Causes
    and prevention of laparoscopic bile duct injuries. Ann Surg.
    2003;237:460–9. https://doi.org/10.1097/01.sla.0000060680.92690.
    e9.
21. Sobba KB, Fernandez AZ, Mcnatt SS, Powell MS, Nunn AM,
    et al. Live quality assurance: using a multimedia messaging ser-
    vice group chat to instantly grade intraoperative images. 2020.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jamcollsurg.2019.09.022.
22. Tokuyasu T, Iwashita Y, Matsunobu Y, Kamiyama T, Ishikake M,
    et al. Development of an artificial intelligence system using deep
    learning to indicate anatomical landmarks during laparoscopic
    cholecystectomy. Surg Endosc. 2020. https://doi.org/10.1007/
    s00464-­020-­07548-­x.
23. Madani A, Namazi B, Altieri MS, Hashimoto DA, Rivera AM,
    et al. Artificial Intelligence for Intraoperative Guidance. Ann
    Surg. 2020. https://doi.org/10.1097/sla.0000000000004594.
684    W. C. Sherrill III and L. M. Brunt

24. Vera K, Pei KY, Schuster KM, Davis KA. Validation of a new
    American Association for the Surgery of Trauma (AAST)
    anatomic severity grading system for acute cholecystitis. J
    Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2018;84:650–4. https://doi.org/10.1097/
    TA.0000000000001762.
25. Okamoto K, Suzuki K, Takada T, Strasberg SM, Asbun HJ, et al.
    Tokyo guidelines 2018: flowchart for the management of acute
    cholecystitis. J Hepatobiliary Pancreat Sci. 2018;25:55–72. https://
    doi.org/10.1002/jhbp.516.
26. Törnqvist B, Waage A, Zheng Z, Ye W, Nilsson M. Severity of
    acute cholecystitis and risk of iatrogenic bile duct injury during
    cholecystectomy, a population-based case-control study. World J
    Surg. 2016;40:1060–7. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00268-­0 15-­3365-­1.
27. Hussain A. Difficult laparoscopic cholecystectomy: current
    evidence and strategies of management. Surg Laparosc Endosc
    Percutan Tech. 2011;21:211–7.
28. Strasberg SM. A teaching program for the “culture of safety in cho-
    lecystectomy” and avoidance of bile duct injury. J Am Coll Surg.
    2013;217:751. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jamcollsurg.2013.05.001.
29. Strasberg SM, Pucci MJ, Brunt LM, Deziel DJ. Subtotal chole-
    cystectomy-"Fenestrating" vs “reconstituting” subtypes and the
    prevention of bile duct injury: definition of the optimal procedure
    in difficult operative conditions. J Am Coll Surg. 2016;222:89–96.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jamcollsurg.2015.09.019.
30. Strasberg SM, Gouma DJ. “Extreme” vasculobiliary inju-
    ries: association with fundus-down cholecystectomy in
    severely inflamed gallbladders. HPB. 2012;14:1–8. https://doi.
    org/10.1111/j.1477-­2574.2011.00393.x.
31. Navez B, Ungureanu F, Michiels M, Claeys D, Muysoms F,
    et al. Surgical management of acute cholecystitis: results of a
    2-year prospective multicenter survey in Belgium. Surg Endosc.
    2012;26:2436–45. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00464-­0 12-­2206-­7.
32. Schwaitzberg SD, Scott DJ, Jones DB, McKinley SK, Castrillion J,
    et al. Threefold increased bile duct injury rate is associated with
    less surgeon experience in an insurance claims database: more
    rigorous training in biliary surgery may be needed. Surg Endosc.
    2014;28:3068–73. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00464-­0 14-­3580-­0.
33. Halbert C, Altieri MS, Yang J, Meng Z, Chen H, et al. Long-term
    outcomes of patients with common bile duct injury following
    laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Surg Endosc. 2016;30:4294–9.
    https://doi.org/10.1007/s00464-­0 16-­4745-­9.
      Chapter 35.   The Critical View of Safety: Creating…      685

34. Pitt HA, Sherman S, Johnson MS, Hollenbeck AN, Lee J, et al.
    Improved outcomes of bile duct injuries in the 21st century. Ann
    Surg. 2013;258:490–7.
35. Hernandez M, Murphy B, Aho JM, Haddad NN, Saleem H,
    et al. Validation of the AAST EGS acute cholecystitis grade and
    comparison with the Tokyo guidelines. Surgery. 2018;163:739–46.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.surg.2017.10.041.
Chapter 36
Mentorship and Quality
in Surgery
Dina Tabello and Jonathan M. Dort



Mentor was the name of the advisor of the young Telemachus
in Homer’s Odyssey. The word mentor is both a noun and a
verb, the noun defined as “an experienced and trusted advisor”
and the verb defined as “to advise or train (someone, especially
a younger colleague).” As surgical education moved from the
pure apprenticeship model to an increasingly formalized and
regulated structure, the necessity to define optimal mentorship
has become increasingly important. Equally, as the focus on
evaluating quality care and optimizing patient outcomes
becomes more resolute and the focus on individual surgeons
more intense, the requirement of the surgical community to
identify best practices in mentorship has become paramount.
In its purest form, a mentor is a senior member of a field who
guides a trainee in personal, professional, and educational mat-
ters. Mentoring differs from coaching in that coaching is more
performance driven, designed to improve on-the-job perfor-


D. Tabello
Inova Fairfax Medical Campus, Falls Church, VA, USA
e-mail: Dina.tabello@inova.org
J. M. Dort (*)
Department of Surgery, Inova Fairfax Medical Campus,
Falls Church, VA, USA
e-mail: Jonathan.dort@inova.org

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature   687
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_36
688   D. Tabello and J. M. Dort

mance, while mentoring is more development driven, focused
more on long-term goals and career development. In this chap-
ter, the current state of mentorship and coaching will be dis-
cussed, specifically covering the qualities that best define
optimal mentorship, the structure of how it is best delivered,
and finally the assessments of how well-executed mentorship
can positively impact surgical outcomes, patient safety, and
surgeon performance. SAGES programs aimed at evaluating
current mentorship practices and proposing innovative ways to
provide optimal mentorship will also be presented. At the end
of the Odyssey, Telemachus achieves immortality. Fortunately,
the current assessment metrics around successful mentorship
outcomes are not that severe.
   Surgical trainees (be they residents, medical students, or
junior faculty) need high-quality mentors to learn from. The
surgical environment is unique; it consists of several distinct
characteristics that set it apart from other professional set-
tings even within the healthcare system. The expectations and
personalities of surgical staff and attending surgeons, com-
bined with the stresses associated with the operating room,
often present a challenging learning environment for surgical
trainees of all disciplines [1]. As a result, mentors have been
an integral part of surgical training since William Halsted;
influenced by the Socratic teaching method, he incorporated
them into his design for surgical education. Halsted’s own
mentee, Harvey Cushing, who went on to develop the spe-
cialty of neurosurgery, exemplifies the fruitfulness of good
mentorship [2]. The importance of surgical mentors is still
recognized, and many surgical training programs assign a
faculty mentor to support and guide their less experienced
colleagues. However, as Rohrich noted in his commentary on
mentoring in medicine, he is “fearful that mentoring is
becoming a lost art in medicine...” [3].
   In a systematic review of surgical mentorship, Entezami
et al. found the most frequent topic written on mentorship
focused on mentor qualities. The most commonly discussed
mentor qualities deemed to be essential for an effective men-
tor were (in order of importance) acting as a professional role
model, staying involved (specifically in terms of time and
          Chapter 36. Mentorship and Quality in Surgery      689

effort), being compassionate/kind/supportive, acting as a
critic/evaluator/assessor, being a leader in the field, and chal-
lenging the surgical student. Additional topics found in their
meta-analysis included the structure of mentor-mentee rela-
tionships, and advice for overcoming barriers to mentoring.
They also point out the relative scarcity of literature related
to surgical mentoring, and that there is not a standard or con-
sensus on how to address these questions [1].
   As Entezami et al. pointed out, several of the barriers to
effective surgical mentoring were time constraints and a lack
of female mentors. These barriers can be overcome, and
effective mentor-mentee relationships can be built. By devel-
oping formal programs to alleviate time constraints, some
authors suggested formally adding time to meet with mentees
to the mentor’s schedule. Others encouraged mentors to
meet with mentees in a nonmedical setting, which would also
allow for discussions regarding personal aspects of life. Due
to this shortage of female mentors, the vast majority of
female mentees are paired with male mentors. Although gen-
der may not directly affect mentorships in the professional
setting, men and women may encounter different decisions
and barriers throughout their careers and personal lives [1].
Nevertheless, Gurgel et al. found that only about 8% of resi-
dents (both male and female) prefer a mentor of the same
gender [4].
   The mentoring of surgical students is an art that has
evolved considerably since Halsted’s apprenticeship model,
and has helped the field expand into new disciplines. What
differentiates mentoring from other professional relation-
ships is its emphasis on teaching. The role of the mentor is to
define professional or academic goals, and then serve as a
guide toward the achievement of those goals. Learning from
a mentor should be via active teaching, and not just observa-
tional [5]. Mentoring has been identified by some learners as
the single most important aspect of training [6]. In addition,
positive surgical role models have been shown to increase the
likelihood of medical students pursuing surgical careers.
Conversely, negative role models and negative behavior of
superiors were major deterrents from a career in surgery [7].
690   D. Tabello and J. M. Dort

Mentoring is also directly associated with improved profes-
sional satisfaction. Sambunjak et al. demonstrated that junior
attendings with mentors were more likely to be promoted [6],
and Steele et al. showed that the experience of a mentor rela-
tionship led to faculty retention [8]. Additional studies have
addressed the link between surgical coaching and surgeon
outcomes. Greenberg et al. identified three domains that
effective coaching could target: technical skill, cognitive skill,
and nontechnical skill [9]. They point out that although these
domains are considered separate, they are interrelated, and
that coaching interventions may target any or all three. They
conclude with identifying four questions which need to be
addressed in optimizing surgical coaching. These questions
include identifying which surgical skills are amenable to
coaching, how to best identify and train effective coaches,
how to deliver the most effective coaching experience, and if
and how effective coaching can improve surgical perfor-
mance and patient outcomes.
    While studies identifying direct links between mentorship
and surgical outcomes are lacking, there are many publica-
tions starting to address the connection. Berian et al. set up a
mentor program for 27 surgeons, paired with surgeon men-
tors to help improve hospital quality through a statewide QI
initiative [10]. The survey-based study showed satisfaction
among the participants with the agreement of the importance
of mentorship to achieve the objective, and also identified
four key themes from the responses of the mentors and men-
tees: nuances of data management, culture of quality and
safety, mentor-mentee relationship, and logistics. While iden-
tifying strategies for the initiative, they state that the mentor’s
role required sharing experiences and acting as a resource,
and the mentee’s role required raising questions and identify-
ing barriers. Wolter et al. reported on a mentorship program
in bariatric surgery, where 12 emerging bariatric centers were
coached by 5 experienced bariatric centers by providing guid-
ance on pre- and postsurgical management of their patients
and proctoring of the first interventions. They found compa-
rable outcomes in experienced and emerging centers under
          Chapter 36. Mentorship and Quality in Surgery     691

this coaching arrangement, with no differences seen in com-
plication rates or resolution of obesity-related comorbidities
[11]. Bonrath et al. published a randomized controlled trial
evaluating the effect of a structured coaching plan on the
operative skill level of trainees. In the study, they randomized
residents undergoing a minimally invasive surgery rotation
either to the standard rotation didactics and feedback or to a
structured coaching plan including performance analysis,
debriefing, feedback, and behavior modeling. They found
significant improvements in procedure-specific skill ratings
and decreased technical errors in the coaching group than the
conventional training group. Given these results and others, it
is fair to ask why this level of coaching is not more universal
[12]. Mutabdzic et al. attempted to evaluate that question
with a qualitative interview-based study examining the barri-
ers to the widespread acceptance of coaching. They found
three main concerns among the queried surgeons: question-
ing the value of technical improvement, worry about appear-
ing incompetent, and concern about losing autonomy. Their
conclusion was that the perception of the values of compe-
tency and autonomy deters the full applicability of coaching,
and actually limits the ways in which surgeons can improve
their practice [13]. In an analysis of these two studies,
Greenberg and Klingensmith point out that the goal of surgi-
cal coaching is “to provide a structured approach to teach
self-reflection through facilitated analysis, feedback, and
debriefing.” They also recognize that this type of coaching not
only improves current performance but confers the long-term
skill set of ongoing performance improvement and the ability
and desire to seek and perform self-assessment. Additionally,
they offer approaches to address the stated concerns about
and potential barriers to the widespread acceptance of surgi-
cal coaching. While surgeons may feel they have sufficient
technical skill for the procedures in their practice, coaching
offers approaches that are more effective, and are applicable
to both technical and nontechnical skills. To combat the
worry of loss of appearance of competence and expertise,
they suggest moving coaching to a more private setting, away
692   D. Tabello and J. M. Dort

from the clinical setting, as well as assuring it is offered in a
nonpunitive way. Finally, to offset the perceived loss of auton-
omy, the coaching should be aimed at self-directed learning
and self-assessment [14].
   A mandatory, structured mentorship program with senior
surgeons benefits most junior faculty members in terms of
academic career planning and becoming more involved with
surgical organizations, according to Phitayakorn et al. [15].
Here, a departmental faculty mentoring program was imple-
mented that consisted of both structured and informal meet-
ings between junior faculty mentees and assigned senior
faculty mentors. All senior faculty mentors attended a brief
mentor training session. They developed an evidence-based
mentorship instrument that featured standardized metrics of
academic success. This instrument was completed by each
mentee, and then reviewed at the junior faculty’s annual
career conference with their division chief. A survey was dis-
tributed to assess junior faculty satisfaction with the new
mentorship program. Over 75% of junior faculty members
were very or somewhat satisfied with the mentorship pro-
gram and would like to continue in the program. In terms of
program outcomes, junior faculty members agreed that the
mentorship program improved their overall career plans and
enhanced their involvement in professional organizations but
has not yet helped with academic productivity, home and/or
work balance, and overall job satisfaction. A survey by Kibbe
et al. showed that only half of the departments of surgery in
the United States have an established mentorship program
and that most are unstructured and informal [16].
   Dutta et al. completed a study that looked at the mecha-
nisms by which mentoring may support professional
development in underrepresented groups. They compared
­
various health-related and attitudinal measures in mentees at
baseline, 6 months, and 1 year into the mentoring relationship
and compared pre-mentoring expectations to outcomes at
6 months and 1-year follow-up for mentees and mentors. Job-­
related well-being (anxiety-contentment), self-esteem, and
self-efficacy all improved significantly, and work-family con-
         Chapter 36. Mentorship and Quality in Surgery    693

flict diminished at 1 year. Highest expectations were career
progression (89%), increased confidence (87%), develop-
ment of networking skills (75%), better time management
(66%), and better work-life balance (64%). For mentees,
expectations at baseline were higher than perceived achieve-
ments at 6 months or 1-year follow-up. This uncontrolled pilot
study suggests that mentoring can improve aspects of job-­
related well-being, self-esteem, and self-efficacy over
6 months, with further improvements seen after 1 year for
female academics. Work-family conflict can also diminish.
Despite these gains, mentees’ prior expectations were shown
to be unrealistically high, but mentors’ expectations were
exceeded [17]. In medicine, an increasing number of women
are pursuing academic careers, but available senior mentors
to provide career guidance are often lacking. Levinson et al.
reported the results of a national survey of 558 full-time fac-
ulty women, aged 50 years and younger, in departments of
medicine in the United States, regarding their experience
with role models and mentors. Women with mentors report
more publications and more time spent on research activity
than those without mentors. Women with a role model
reported higher overall career satisfaction [15].
    Another study by DeCastro et al. did demonstrate that
women acknowledged the importance of at least one female
mentor. This group surveyed 100 former National Institutes
of Health-mentored career development award winners and
28 of their mentors. Three important themes emerged from
this survey: that mentors serve in numerous and varied roles
in academic medicine; that a single mentor is unlikely to ful-
fill the diverse needs of a mentee; and that a network of men-
tors is typically more helpful overall [18].
    SAGES has long sought, and continues to strive for, best
practices as it relates to improving quality care and patient
outcomes through robust mentorship. The SAGES ADOPT
program has shown that the duration of mentorship can
affect mentee performance when learning new procedures.
The program, developed by the SAGES Continuing
Education Committee, examined the effect of longitudinal
694   D. Tabello and J. M. Dort

mentorship on the qualitative and quantitative benefits of
procedure adoption by mentees. By standardizing the
approach to mentorship through a train-the-trainers course
and by expanding the single hands-on course to a yearlong
longitudinal mentorship, both the qualitative confidence
levels of the mentees and the number of new procedures
performed by the mentees were both shown to significantly
increase [19]. Originally studied for the hands-on hernia
course, these findings have been confirmed over multiple
specialty areas, including foregut and colorectal surgery [20].
Nguyen et al. studied the feasibility, effectiveness, and satis-
faction of a telementoring program for laparoscopic sleeve
gastrectomy as part of a SAGES multi-institutional quality
improvement initiative. They showed that the program was
well received by the mentees and mentors and found to be
feasible, practical, and successful [21]. The Project 6 SAGES
telementoring initiative was created to address the current
state of telementoring and detail the challenges and oppor-
tunities of the future. They identified five opportunity areas
that would require review and evaluation: legal and regula-
tory, business development and proving value, effective com-
munication and education requirements, technology
requirements, and logistics. The value of placing the mentor
and mentee in the same operating room on a large scale was
recognized, but the work necessary to push this grand-scale
vision forward was explored [22].
    The story of surgical mentorship is both ancient and still in
its infancy. The best way to provide mentorship, the qualities
that make it more or less successful, and ultimately the posi-
tive effect on both surgeons and the patients they care for, are
all metrics that are still being evaluated and recognized.
While the science of best practices to produce optimal men-
torship is still being researched, there are elements for suc-
cess we know to be true. The success of mentorship is
two-sided, with responsibilities for both the mentor and the
mentee. The benefits of this relationship must be bidirec-
tional in order for it to succeed. It is the responsibility of both
the student and the mentor to assure this bidirectional
          Chapter 36. Mentorship and Quality in Surgery       695

exchange of benefit. This relationship requires time, patience,
dedication, and to some degree selflessness. This mentorship
will ultimately be the best tool for mastering complex profes-
sional skills and maturing through various learning curves.
There is little doubt that surgeons require strong mentorship
as part of their training. After all, the life of a surgeon is
unique and often challenging, and an effective mentor can be
the difference between a surgeon who is skilled and fulfilled,
as opposed to one who is simply competent. This passage of
wisdom, skills, and support from mentor to mentee, which is
then passed through many generations, achieves its own type
of immortality. And that is no myth.


References
1. Entezami P, Franzblau L, Chung K. Mentorship in surgical train-
   ing: a systemic review. Hand. 2012;7:30–6.
2. Assael LA. Every surgeon needs mentors: a Halsteadian/
   Socratic model in the modern age. J Oral Maxillofac Surg.
   2010;68(6):1217–8.
3. Rohrich RJ. Mentors in medicine. Plast Reconstr Surg.
   2003;112(4):1087–8.
4. Gurgel RK, Schiff BA, Flint JH, et al. Mentoring in otolar-
   yngology training programs. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg.
   2010;142(4):487–92.
5. Platz J, Hyman N. Mentorship. Clin Colon Rectal Surg.
   2013;26(4):218–23. https://doi.org/10.1055/s-­0 033-­1356720.
6. Sambunjak D, Straus SE, Marusić A. Mentoring in academic
   medicine: a systematic review. JAMA. 2006;296(9):1103.
7. Healy NA, Glynn RW, Malone C, Cantillon P, Kerin MJ. Surgical
   mentors and role models: prevalence, importance and associated
   traits. J Surg Educ. 2012;69(5):633–7.
8. Steele MM, Fisman S, Davidson B. Mentoring and role models
   in recruitment and retention: a study of junior medical faculty
   perceptions. Med Teach. 2013;35(5):e1130–8.
9. Greenberg CC, Ghousseini HN, Pavuluri Quamme SR, et al.
   Surgical coaching for individual performance improvement. Ann
   Surg. 2015;261:32–4.
696    D. Tabello and J. M. Dort

10. Berian JR, Thomas JM, Minami CA, et al. Evaluation of a novel
    mentor program to improve surgical care for US hospitals. Int J
    Qual Health Care. 2017;29(2):234–42.
11. Wolter S, Dupree A, El Gammal A, et al. Mentorship programs
    in bariatric surgery reduce peri-operative complication rate and
    equal short-term outcome- results from the OPTIMIZE trial.
    Obes Surg. 2019;29(1):127–36.
12. Bonrath EM, Dedy NJ, Gordon LE, et al. Comprehensive sur-
    gical coaching enhances surgical skill in the operating room: a
    randomized controlled trial. Ann Surg. 2015;262(2):205–12.
13. Mutabdzic D, Mylopoulos M, Murnaghan ML, et al. Coaching
    surgeons: is culture limiting our ability to improve? Ann Surg.
    2015;262(2):213–6.
14. Greenberg CC, Klingensmith ME. The continuum of coaching:
    opportunities for surgical improvement at all levels. Ann Surg.
    2015;262(2):217–9.
15. Levinson W, Kaufman K, Clark B, Tolle SW. Mentors and
    role models for women in academic medicine. West J Med.
    1991;154(4):423–6.
16. Kibbe MR, Pellegrini CA, Townsend CM, Helenowski IB, Patti
    MG. Characterization of mentorship programs in departments
    of surgery in the United States. JAMA Surg. 2016;151:900–6.
17. Dutta R, Hawkes SL, Kuipers E, Guest D, Fear NT, Iversen
    AC. One year outcomes of a mentoring scheme for female aca-
    demics: a pilot study at the Institute of Psychiatry, King’s College
    London. BMC Med Educ. 2011;11:13. Published 7 Apr 2011.
    https://doi.org/10.1186/1472-­6920-­11-­13.
18. DeCastro R, Sambuco D, Ubel PA, Stewart A, Jagsi R. Mentor
    networks in academic medicine: moving beyond a dyadic con-
    ception of mentoring for junior faculty researchers. Acad Med.
    2013;88(4):488–96.
19. Dort J, Trickey A, Paige J, Schwarz E, Dunkin B. Hands-on
    2.0: improving transfer of training via the Society of American
    Gastrointestinal and Endoscopic Surgeons (SAGES) Acquisition
    of Data for Outcomes and Procedure Transfer (ADOPT) pro-
    gram. Surg Endosc. 2017;31(8):3326–32.
20. Dort J, Trickey A, Schwarz E, Paige J. Something for everyone:
    the benefits of longitudinal mentorship with the application of
    the acquisition of data for outcomes and procedure transfer
    (ADOPT) program to a SAGES hands-on colectomy course.
    Surg Endosc. 2019;33(9):3062–8.
          Chapter 36. Mentorship and Quality in Surgery    697

21. Nguyen NT, Okrainec A, Anvari M, et al. Sleeve gastrectomy
    telementoring: a SAGES multi-institutional quality improve-
    ment initiative. Surg Endosc. 2018;32(2):682–7.
22. Schlachta CM, Nguyen NT, Ponsky T, Dunkin B. Project 6
    summit: SAGES telementoring initiative. Surg Endosc.
    2016;30(9):3665–72.
                      Part V
Threats to Surgical Quality,
     Outcomes, and Safety
Chapter 37
Disparities in Healthcare:
The Effect on Surgical
Quality
Valeria S. M. Valbuena and Dana A. Telem



Introduction
Disparities in healthcare, defined as “differences in health
status that result from the social disadvantage that is itself
associated with characteristics such as race or ethnicity and
socioeconomic status” [1], have a critical role in determining
the health and wellness of individual patients and communi-
ties alike. In surgical practice, differential access to basic
healthcare and surgical providers’ specialized services is
deeply affected by the modifiable and non-modifiable char-
acteristics of patients and communities. Surgical quality and
the standard post-care and post-procedural outcome mea-
sures we defined it by have often failed to account for the


V. S. M. Valbuena
University of Michigan, Department of Surgery,
Ann Arbor, MI, USA
e-mail: vvaleria@med.umich.edu
D. A. Telem (*)
National Clinician Scholars Program, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, MI, USA
e-mail: dtelem@med.umich.edu

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature    701
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_37
702   V. S. M. Valbuena and D. A. Telem

ecological and systemic influences exerted on the patients for
whom we care. Dedicated surgeons delivering quality care in
both community and academic healthcare systems face the
challenge of recognizing and addressing disparities in health-
care access and delivery to ensure quality care for patients of
all backgrounds.
    Disparities in surgical care affect the health of patients, the
effectiveness of surgeons, and the bottom line of healthcare
systems. No surgeon or surgical practice is immune to the
effects of inequity; hence, it is imperative to (1) learn about
health disparities in surgical care and (2) invest in both
surgeon-­facing and system-wide solutions. In this chapter, we
will describe how disparities in healthcare access and delivery
affect surgical outcomes. We will provide the reader with
strategies that can be employed to eliminate or reduce out-
come differences in the surgical patient.


Healthcare Access and the Surgical Patient
To illustrate how healthcare disparities affect the quality of
care of surgical patients, we will discuss differential access to
healthcare resources, which is a significant factor driving
healthcare disparities. Access to healthcare means having the
opportunity to timely obtain healthcare services to achieve
the best health outcomes [2]. Access to healthcare has been
historically influenced by patient factors, including gender,
socioeconomic status, race, ethnicity, employment, and insur-
ance status [3]. Although each one of these patient factors has
been independently associated with disparities in access to
almost every aspect of modern healthcare, their compounded
effect and close relationships (especially as it pertains to
racial identity and socioeconomic status) make it difficult to
tell them apart when investigating the role of healthcare
access as a driver of healthcare disparities.
      Chapter 37.   Disparities in Healthcare: The Effect…      703

    Patients living in poverty, patients who belong to minori-
tized racial and ethnic communities, and patients who belong
to gender minorities have been shown to have more limited
access to both well-resourced primary care [4] and quality
surgical services [5]. Safety net hospitals that serve higher
proportions of minoritized patients have fewer resources and
worse outcomes than hospitals who serve more socially
secure patients [6]. Similarly, a patient’s geographical loca-
tion, independent of race or gender, plays a large role in
access disparities [7]. For example, geographical disparities
have been reported in the patterns of utilization of surgical
therapy for the management of hepatocellular carcinoma [8].
    When equal access to healthcare services is provided, this
has a positive effect on healthcare disparities. A recent evalu-
ation of TRICARE insurance data, which represents a large
population with universal insurance, found no risk-adjusted
differences in outcomes between Black and White patients
following coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG). This was
a notable finding given the well-documented racial dispari-
ties in outcomes among patients undergoing the same proce-
dure in settings without universal coverage [9]. When thinking
about surgical quality, concentrating strictly on access to sur-
gical services it is a logical first step, but extending the discus-
sion beyond the initial surgical encounter is paramount. For
example, a lack of access to basic primary care and screening
services affects the natural history of many diseases in the
surgical spectrum. The current body of evidence demon-
strates patients presenting with advanced oncologic disease
at the time of diagnosis are more likely to be members of
minoritized groups and have lower socioeconomic status [10,
11]. Despite the major role that healthcare access plays in
surgical quality, having equal access on its own does not trans-
late into quality care. The delivery of such services, the
­systems that support patients, and the providers play a simi-
 larly important role in the larger framework of healthcare
 equity.
704   V. S. M. Valbuena and D. A. Telem

Healthcare Delivery and the Surgical Patient
“A healthcare delivery system is an organization of people,
institutions, and resources to deliver the health needs of a
target population” [12]. In the field of surgery, this encom-
passes the care delivery systems and surgical providers. It also
includes when and why we provide surgical services to a
population. Similar to surgical care access, delivery of surgical
care is not equal across different groups. Disparities in patient
perceptions, as well as short- and long-term surgical out-
comes, are well documented. Perioperative racial and ethnic
disparities have been described in patients undergoing major
cancer and non-cancer procedures at American College of
Surgeons National Surgical Quality Improvement Program
institutions [13]. Significant racial disparities are reported in
limb-salvage revascularization, with Black patients compris-
ing 29% of patients undergoing a major lower extremity
amputation, but only 10% of those undergoing a procedure
for limb salvage when compared to White patients [14]. In
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) patients, Black patients
with IBD had 37% greater risk of death and serious morbid-
ity after surgery compared to White patients [15].
   From urologic cancer surgery, to surgical readmission rates
across specialties, wound complications, and reoperations,
minoritized patients receiving similar care to White patients
have poorer outcomes and worse prognosis [16, 17]. When we
control for race, ethnicity, and gender and evaluate the deliv-
ery of surgical care based solely on the type of insurance used
by the patient, uninsured patients and patients using primary
Medicaid insurance (the national public health insurance in
the United States for low-income citizens) have similar
trends toward worse outcomes [18]. For example, both
Medicaid and Medicare primary payer status have been
shown to be associated with worse postoperative outcomes
for patients with gynecologic malignancies, with Medicare
and Medicaid patients being more likely to require ICU
admission and longer lengths of stay compared to privately
insured patients [19].
      Chapter 37.   Disparities in Healthcare: The Effect…     705

   The stark reality of our surgical care delivery problem can
be overwhelming. The existing evidence may indicate that
operating on patients with certain modifiable and non-­
modifiable characteristics may lead to worse outcomes; how-
ever, this narrative is incorrect. Being Black and Hispanic/
Latinx and belonging to a low socioeconomic status are not
in themselves the root causes of why the care delivered to
these patients does not translate in similar outcomes to White
patients. The larger system in which care is delivered is one
that was not initially designed for the benefit of these groups.
And so, hospital systems and surgeons alike face a larger
challenge than just personal change, the challenge to recog-
nize and address the effects of bias and systemic racism in
surgical quality [17].


 ystemic Racism and the Differential Access
S
and Delivery of Surgical Care
Systemic racism, also known as institutional racism, is a form
of racism that is embedded as normal practice within society
or an organization. It can lead to such issues as discrimination
in criminal justice, employment, housing, healthcare, political
power, and education [20]. In simpler words, systemic racism
as it pertains to healthcare represents the insidious way both
society and the system of care access and delivery have been
designed to underserve non-White patients. Although spe-
cific provider factors (e.g., referral patterns, cultural compe-
tency, awareness of inequities) and system of care delivery
characteristics (e.g., hospital quality and location) have been
shown to account in part for health disparity trends [1], a
large part of the association between non-modifiable patient
characteristics such as race and healthcare disparities remains
unaccounted for. The long-standing use of race as a risk
­factor for worse clinical outcomes may give us a clue as to
 where this association’s real culprit resides [21]. As it pertains
 to race specifically, systems of care are inherently biased
 against patients of color. It is racism, and not race, that drives
706   V. S. M. Valbuena and D. A. Telem

the disparate outcomes in surgical patients and the variation
in quality surgical care documented in the literature. Race is
not a biological trait, but a social construct that has been
medicalized to explain away the effects injustice and racism
have on a patient’s health and well-being with no scientific
evidence to base these claims on [22].
   Although not direct culprits, hospital quality and “who
gets care where” also contribute to this phenomenon.
Minoritized and vulnerable patients have been shown to
access care at lower-quality hospitals and receive interven-
tions by less experienced surgeons compared to White
patients [23, 24]. For example, in a 2014 study of hospital
quality and its relationship with racial disparity outcomes in
cardiac surgery, hospital quality alone impacted the mortality
rates of patients undergoing CABG, with non-White patients
having a 33% higher risk-adjusted mortality rate after the
procedure compared to White patients, with hospital quality
driving 35% of the observed disparity in mortality rates [25].
Turning our attention away from “patient risk factors” and
redirecting it to social determinants of health (i.e., availability
of safe housing, access to healthy food, educational opportu-
nities, job safety, transportation, social support, exposure to
crime, literacy) and the other modifiable aspects of surgical
care playing a role in surgical disparities is a promising con-
ceptual framework for the hospital and surgeon hoping to
make a change [1]. Changing the narrative of surgical dispari-
ties by shifting the responsibility away from patients and onto
the systems of oppression dominating the professional envi-
ronments where we work and provide care is the first step
toward addressing these issues and starting the journey
toward surgical equity.


Surgical Equity
A solution framework to address healthcare disparities and
their effect in surgical quality is one that has as its primary
goal-achieving surgical equity. The interplay between access,
      Chapter 37.   Disparities in Healthcare: The Effect…   707

delivery, and patient factors on surgical outcomes is best illus-
trated by Haider et al. in their comprehensive review of racial
disparities in surgical outcomes [17]. Within their proposed
framework, one can recognize the contribution of patient
characteristics, system limitations, and provider factors to
healthcare disparities in surgery. Their framework also pro-
vides one way to think about the complex issues of healthcare
disparities within the lens of surgical care delivery systems
where the multiple components interact with each other. It
can be used to evaluate the independent role of stakeholders
in the phenomenon and as a roadmap for thinking critically
about actionable strategies for improvement. Although some
of the strategies proposed as part of their thesis are larger
tasks than others, there is a role for every surgeon, surgical
department, and healthcare system in the journey toward
making care accessible and delivery equal for all patients.


 trategies to Reduce Outcome Disparities
S
in Surgical Care
Much of the academic work in healthcare disparities has con-
centrated on describing the phenomena of differential health-
care access and outcomes for minoritized patients over the
last three decades. Less evidence exists for effective interven-
tions to address these disparities, especially in surgical prac-
tice. Progress in this area has been led by social scientists and
primary care specialists who are regularly confronted with
the realities of differential access in their practices. In their
2000 publication, “Inequality in Quality: Addressing
Socioeconomic, Racial, and Ethnic Disparities in Health
Care,” Fiscella et al. outlined five principles for addressing
disparities in healthcare quality. These principles included:

1. Recognizing that disparities are a significant quality
   problem
2. Changing clinical and outcome data collection too inade-
   quate to identify and address disparities
708   V. S. M. Valbuena and D. A. Telem

3. Stratifying performance measures to reflect race/ethnicity
4. Incorporating adjustment for race/ethnicity and socioeco-
   nomic status in population-wide monitoring
5. Developing strategies to adjust financial incentives and pay-
   ments for race/ethnicity and socioeconomic status given the
   role these factors have in access and outcomes [26]

   More recently, Bonner et al. proposed an actionable
“center-­department-surgeon” model to address the worsen-
ing surgical disparities unveiled by the COVID-19 pandemic
[27]. It included similar principles of individual awareness of
health disparities, pertinent data collection for surgical equity,
and development of community partnerships for surgical
needs assessment. Considering these works, we outline four
succinct ways how individual surgeons and surgical care
delivery systems can modify their practice models to strive
for surgical equity.
1. Surgeon Awareness: Recognize Disparities as a Surgical
   Quality Problem
    Some of the information presented earlier in the chapter
might seem like common knowledge in surgical practice, but
there are profound misinformation and disbelief regarding
surgical disparities [28]. In a 2016 survey of 536 general sur-
geon members of the American College of Surgeons, only
37% of participants agreed that racial/ethnic disparities exist
in healthcare, and 5% reported witnessing disparities in their
practice [29]. Commitment to reducing health disparities
starts with an increased state of awareness [30]. Hence, the
first step toward improving health disparities in surgery is for
surgeons to learn about the phenomena by engaging with the
wealth of literature about the topic. Once a baseline level of
knowledge has been established, individual surgeons can
progress toward committing to recognize and address the
disparities within their practice. This strategy is particularly
important for surgeons who do not personally identify with
minoritized groups. Understanding the problem of surgical
      Chapter 37.   Disparities in Healthcare: The Effect…   709

disparities will make the surgical workforce more motivated
to address them [28].
2. Collection of Relevant and Reliable Data Is Needed to
   Address Surgical Quality Disparities
   Every care delivery ecosystem is different. Effective inter-
ventions to address healthcare disparities and, in this case,
surgical outcome and quality disparities need to be tailored
to the needs of the community. Quality reporting needs to
address disparities in healthcare [31]. The lack of baseline
data for surgical access is a large problem. Strategies for sur-
gical access disparities detecting process have been discussed
in the literature [3]. Outcomes, complications, and readmis-
sion data need to be stratified by race, and socioeconomic
status needs to be accounted for when performing risk strati-
fication. For example, take a quality improvement interven-
tion to decrease readmissions secondary to surgical site
infections. If the complications are not stratified by race/eth-
nicity or socioeconomic status, interventions that do not
account for the specific challenges of these patient popula-
tions and adequately design interventions aimed to address
root causes (i.e., ability to complete postoperative recovery
plan, access time off from work to recover, appropriate nutri-
tion, transportation to be evaluated when the signs of the
complication started, financial ability to afford dressing sup-
plies) will be less likely to succeed.
3. Quality and Performance Measures Need to Be Stratified
   and Adjusted for Socioeconomic Position, Race, and
   Ethnicity
   Metrics used to assess quality and healthcare delivery have
historically not comprehensively accounted for disparities in
access to care and the differential outcomes experienced by
minoritized communities [32]. Quality has been defined by
the ideal outcomes experienced by the dominant patient
group in healthcare; however, a line of service cannot claim to
be high quality if this high quality is only experienced by
some patients. Equity in quality should be the goal. In a sys-
710   V. S. M. Valbuena and D. A. Telem

tematic review of surgical access as part of the American
College of Surgeons MEASUR initiative (Metrics for
Equitable Access and Care in SURgery), the authors pro-
posed a conceptual model for classifying surgical access dis-
parity measures in the United States [33]. Surgical detection,
progression to surgery, and optimal care receipt were identi-
fied as concrete areas where incorporating new reporting
measures and quality metrics both at the surgeon level and
the healthcare system level would be necessary.
4. Interventions Need to Be Designed to Specifically Target the
   Surgical Outcomes of Minoritized/Marginalized Groups
   Given the profound disparities in surgical access and qual-
ity experienced by minoritized patients, the relative lack of
policy and programmatic interventions to improve the access
and quality of surgical care for these patients is a large area
for improvement. Individualized interventions that go beyond
attempting to allocate responsibility for poor outcomes to the
social phenotype of each patient and rather recognize the
ways how society has placed an undue burden in large frac-
tions of a population in ways that can significantly affect the
way they receive care and remain healthy are very important.
Paying specific attention to how health disparities affect sur-
gical outcomes and addressing these factors directly can
change the narrative of care for patients in need. There are
several types of interventions to address surgical disparities.
A recent research review identified four themes that domi-
nated surgical disparities interventions: (1) condition-specific
targeted efforts; (2) increased reliance on quantitative fac-
tors; (3) doctor-patient communication; and (4) cultural
humility [34]. Examples of these interventions span from
regional collaboratives to reduce health disparities in access
to kidney transplantation among Black patients with ESRD
[35] to the Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) initia-
tive, which has improved the racial disparities in ­postoperative
length of stay after major colorectal surgery [36]. Adapting
successful disparity-reducing interventions from other disci-
plines, such as the formation of a regional quality improve-
     Chapter 37.   Disparities in Healthcare: The Effect…      711

ment collaborative to reduce racial disparities in severe
maternal morbidity from postpartum hemorrhage [37], is
another promising strategy. Organizational commitment,
engagement of experts outside of surgery and patient groups
who have unique and key perspectives on what their barriers
to accessing care are, and comprehensive engagement of local
and national regulatory and policy mechanisms are key ele-
ments of designing interventions targeting the access and
quality of surgical care of minoritized groups, and making
progress in health disparities as a whole [30].


Conclusions
Surgical quality and outcomes are impacted by disparities in
surgical access and delivery. Individual and system-wide
interventions are needed, starting with recognizing the prob-
lem. Data collection, stratified quality measures, and inter-
ventions targeted toward differential allocation of resources
to those who need them the most are important strategies to
ensure quality surgical care is available for all.


References
1. Perez NP, Pernat CA, Chang DC. Surgical disparities: beyond
   non-modifiable patient factors. In: Dimick JB, Lubitz CC, edi-
   tors. Health services research. Cham: Springer; 2020. p. 57–69.
2. Gulliford M, et al. What does ‘access to health care’ mean? J
   Health Serv Res Policy. 2002;7(3):186–8.
3. Wong JH, et al. Development and assessment of a systematic
   approach for detecting disparities in surgical access. JAMA Surg.
   2020;156(3):239–45.
4. Varkey AB, et al. Separate and unequal: clinics where minor-
   ity and nonminority patients receive primary care. Arch Intern
   Med. 2009;169(3):243–50.
5. Rothenberg BM, et al. Explaining disparities in access to high-­
   quality cardiac surgeons. Ann Thorac Surg. 2004;78(1):18–24;
   discussion 24–5.
712    V. S. M. Valbuena and D. A. Telem

 6. Hoehn RS, et al. Effect of hospital safety-net burden on cost and
    outcomes after surgery. JAMA Surg. 2016;151(2):120–8.
 7. Horev T, Pesis-Katz I, Mukamel DB. Trends in geographic dis-
    parities in allocation of health care resources in the US. Health
    Policy. 2004;68(2):223–32.
 8. Sonnenday CJ, et al. Racial and geographic disparities in the
    utilization of surgical therapy for hepatocellular carcinoma. J
    Gastrointest Surg. 2007;11(12):1636–46. discussion 1646
 9. Chaudhary MA, et al. No racial disparities in surgical care qual-
    ity observed after coronary artery bypass grafting in TRICARE
    patients. Health Aff (Millwood). 2019;38(8):1307–12.
10. Lannin DR, et al. Influence of socioeconomic and cultural fac-
    tors on racial differences in late-stage presentation of breast
    cancer. JAMA. 1998;279(22):1801–7.
11. Chornokur G, et al. Disparities at presentation, diagnosis, treat-
    ment, and survival in African American men, affected by pros-
    tate cancer. Prostate. 2011;71(9):985–97.
12. Piña IL, et al. A framework for describing health care delivery
    organizations and systems.Am J Public Health. 2015;105(4):670–9.
13. Ravi P, et al. Racial/ethnic disparities in perioperative outcomes
    of major procedures: results from the National Surgical Quality
    Improvement Program. Ann Surg. 2015;262(6):955–64.
14. Hughes K, et al. Racial/ethnic disparities in revasculariza-
    tion for limb salvage: an analysis of the National Surgical
    Quality Improvement Program database. Vasc Endovasc Surg.
    2014;48(5–6):402–5.
15. Montgomery SR Jr, et al. Racial disparities in surgical out-
    comes of patients with inflammatory bowel disease. Am J Surg.
    2018;215(6):1046–50.
16. Sathianathen NJ, et al. Racial disparities in surgical outcomes
    among males following major urologic cancer surgery. Am J Prev
    Med. 2018;55(5 Suppl 1):S14–s21.
17. Haider AH, et al. Racial disparities in surgical care and out-
    comes in the United States: a comprehensive review of patient,
    provider, and systemic factors. J Am Coll Surg. 2013;216(3):482–
    92.e12.
18. LaPar DJ, et al. Primary payer status affects mortality for major
    surgical operations. Ann Surg. 2010;252(3):544–50; discussion
    550–1.
19. Ahmad TR, et al. Medicaid and medicare payer status are asso-
    ciated with worse surgical outcomes in gynecologic oncology.
    Gynecol Oncol. 2019;155(1):93–7.
       Chapter 37.    Disparities in Healthcare: The Effect…         713

20. Griffith DM, et al. Dismantling institutional racism: theory and
    action. Am J Community Psychol. 2007;39(3–4):381–92.
21. Lim GHT, et al. Students’ perceptions on race in medical educa-
    tion and healthcare. Perspect Med Educ. 2021;10(2):1–5.
22. Witzig R. The medicalization of race: scientific legitimization of
    a flawed social construct. Ann Intern Med. 1996;125(8):675–9.
23. Dimick J, et al. Black patients more likely than Whites to
    undergo surgery at low-quality hospitals in segregated regions.
    Health Aff (Millwood). 2013;32(6):1046–53.
24. Regenbogen SE, et al. Do differences in hospital and surgeon
    quality explain racial disparities in lower-extremity vascular
    amputations? Ann Surg. 2009;250(3):424–31.
25. Rangrass G, Ghaferi AA, Dimick JB. Explaining racial dispari-
    ties in outcomes after cardiac surgery: the role of hospital quality.
    JAMA Surg. 2014;149(3):223–7.
26. Fiscella K, et al. Inequality in quality addressing socioeco-
    nomic, racial, and ethnic disparities in health care. JAMA.
    2000;283(19):2579–84.
27. Bonner SN, et al. Covid-19 and racial disparities: moving towards
    surgical equity. Ann Surg. 2020;272(3):e224–5.
28. Britton BV, et al. Awareness of racial/ethnic disparities in surgi-
    cal outcomes and care: factors affecting acknowledgment and
    action. Am J Surg. 2016;212(1):102–108.e2.
29. Britton BV, et al. US Surgeons’ perceptions of racial/ethnic
    disparities in health care: a cross-sectional study. JAMA Surg.
    2016;151(6):582–4.
30. Chin MH, et al. A roadmap and best practices for organizations
    to reduce racial and ethnic disparities in health care. J Gen
    Intern Med. 2012;27(8):992–1000.
31. Jha AK, Zaslavsky AM. Quality reporting that addresses dis-
    parities in health care. JAMA. 2014;312(3):225–6.
32. DeMeester RH, Xu LJ, Nocon RS, Cook SC, Ducas AM, Chin
    MH. Solving disparities through payment and delivery sys-
    tem reform: a program to achieve health equity. Health Aff.
    2017;36(6):1133–9.
33. de Jager E, et al. Disparities in surgical access: a systematic lit-
    erature review, conceptual model, and evidence map. J Am Coll
    Surg. 2019;228(3):276–98.
34. Hisam B, et al. From understanding to action: interventions for
    surgical disparities. J Surg Res. 2016;200(2):560–78.
714    V. S. M. Valbuena and D. A. Telem

35. Patzer RE, et al. A randomized trial to reduce disparities
    in referral for transplant evaluation. J Am Soc Nephrol.
    2017;28(3):935–42.
36. Wahl TS, et al. Enhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS)
    eliminates racial disparities in postoperative length of stay after
    colorectal surgery. Ann Surg. 2018;268(6):1026–35.
37. Main EK, et al. Reduction in racial disparities in severe maternal
    morbidity from hemorrhage in a large-scale quality improve-
    ment collaborative. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2020;223(1):123.
    e1–123.e14.
Chapter 38
Surgeon Wellness:
Scope of the Problem
and Strategies
to Avoid Burnout
John R. Romanelli


Introduction
   “Physician wellness is on a spectrum, and where physicians reside
   on the spectrum can change due to the influence of acute and
   chronic stressors… burnout is the extreme pejorative end of the
   spectrum from which recovery is not thought to be possible….”

   It is tempting today to frame a difficult problem as a crisis,
but it is easy to argue that the decline in physician wellness is
approaching crisis levels in the United States. The recent
(and, as of the time of this writing, ongoing) pandemic has
only served to exacerbate underlying problems that lead to
physician wellness decline, or, worse, burnout. Population
growth trends already forecast a shortage of surgeons in the
coming decades [1] as caps on trainees per year are rendering
the additions to the surgical workforce short. Further, the
percentage of procedures needed is likely to increase as the


J. R. Romanelli (*)
Department of Surgery, University of Massachusetts Chan Medical
School - Baystate Medical Center, Springfield, MA, USA
e-mail: John.Romanelli@baystatehealth.org

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature        715
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_38
716   J. R. Romanelli

population age increases due to medical advancements, yet
this is superimposed with an overall decline in medical school
graduates seeking surgical residencies [1]. Seeing the work-
force decline further in numbers by deletions due to surgeons
retiring or leaving the field would likely worsen this
problem.
   It is well known that physician wellness decline leads to
adverse outcomes [2–4]. This problem, if left unaddressed,
may present an existential threat to the quality of care deliv-
ered by healthcare practitioners. Like many negative behav-
ioral drivers, the first step in addressing a critical problem is
acceptance of the issue, and recognition that change is
required. Many healthcare administrators fail to acknowl-
edge the scope of the crisis and prefer to adopt a “see no evil,
hear no evil” approach. Victim blaming is common and has
become part of the current healthcare environment (e.g.,
“physicians need to be more resilient”). That said, we sur-
geons are not blameless, either. In fact, many of us during
residency training were subjected to arduous and often non-
sensical work hours, demeaning treatment from attendings
and senior trainees, and an unrealistic work burden, and have
modeled similar behavior toward our trainees and successors
and have maintained expectations of a similarly unrealistic
work burden. In fact, when mandatory work hour limits were
imposed upon resident training in the early 2000s, many sur-
geons reacted with negativity or even scorn, rather than see-
ing this change as a much-needed improvement in the
training culture. Nor was this seen as an opportunity to
reform surgical residency to attract better candidates to the
workforce by humanizing the rigorous training and, in so
doing, accepting that we were a part of creating the decline in
physician wellness.
   This chapter will attempt to take a “30,000-foot view” of
the entire problem. First, one will note the use of the term
“physician wellness decline.” The wellness of healthcare pro-
viders can wax and wane on a spectrum, with acute and
chronic stressors pushing people to and fro on the spectrum.
Therefore, we define “burnout” as the end stage of the well-
  Chapter 38.   Surgeon Wellness: Scope of the Problem…    717

ness spectrum, from which recovery is not possible. Too often,
this term is used interchangeably with a decline in wellness,
but this distinction is important. Burnout is most commonly
defined as the triad of emotional exhaustion (overextension),
depersonalization (negative, callous, and detached responses
to others), and reduced personal accomplishment (feelings of
competence and achievement in one’s work) [5]. This is
known as the Maslach definition, and this appears frequently
in writings on this subject. Another recent description from a
surgical journal defines surgeon wellness as “…a multidimen-
sional commitment that encompasses occupational, mental,
physical, emotional, and social domains. Loss of professional
control, autonomy, and flexibility; inefficient processes; dis-
jointed workplace relationships and goals; excessive adminis-
trative burdens; poor work-life balance; and frustrations with
(electronic) medical record systems have all been associated
with burnout” [6].
    A new version of a previously administered survey [7] has
revealing and troubling statistics regarding physician burn-
out. The respondents were divided into generations such that
“Millennials” were listed as age 40 and under (born 1980 or
after); “Generation X” was defined as age 40–55 (born 1965–
1980); and “Baby Boomers” were defined as aged 55–73
(born before 1965). 42% of physicians in this survey – offered
to physicians of all specialties – felt burned out. This was
worst among Generation X physicians, who reported a 48%
rate of burnout. General surgeons reported a 35% rate of
burnout. There were multiple causes listed, with bureaucratic
tasks being the largest culprit (55%). Other causes, some of
which will be delved into in this chapter, included the amount
of work hours (33%), lack of respect from colleagues/admin-
istration (32%), electronic medical records (EMRs) (30%),
compensation issues (29%), and a lack of control of auton-
omy (24%). These factors varied widely among generations;
for example, EMRs were a much more common cause of
burnout symptoms among Baby Boomers than among
Millennials. Nonetheless, these results show that the driving
factors of wellness decline are multifactorial.
718   J. R. Romanelli

   The survey [7] also examined coping mechanisms for phy-
sicians suffering from wellness issues. Happily – many of
these were positive behavioral maneuvers: exercise (45%),
talking with family/friends (42%), sleep (40%), and listening
or playing music (32%). Negative behaviors such as isolation
(45%), eating junk food (33%), using/abusing alcohol (24%),
and binge eating (20%) were also reported, however.
Surprisingly, use of tobacco and marijuana and the abuse of
prescription drugs were listed at 3% or less; while this survey
could suffer from dishonesty in responses, smoking and/or
drug use clearly does not appear to be a large factor in coping
with professional or personal stressors, which is somewhat
encouraging.
   Burnout is frequently measured quantitatively by the
Maslach Burnout Index [8]. In this index, emotional exhaus-
tion is measured with nine questions; the depersonalization
domain is measured with five questions; and the personal
accomplishment domain is measured with eight questions.
These are scored from 0 to 6 and are based on self-reported
frequency of the item in question. Emotional exhaustion
scores of 27 or greater, depersonalization scores of 10 or
greater, and personal accomplishment scores of 33 or less are
associated with high levels of burnout for physicians.
Interestingly, the personal accomplishment domain does not
tend to correlate with patient outcomes; but emotional
exhaustion and depersonalization do. Although many assume
that emotional exhaustion tends to drive physicians to burn-
out, depersonalization seems to more strongly align with the
negative consequences of burnout [9].
   It does not take a leap of logic to associate physicians who
decline in wellness with poor patient outcomes. A large
national survey of American physicians conducted in 2014 [9]
demonstrated that physicians reporting errors were more
likely to have symptoms of burnout (77.6% vs 51.5%;
P < 0.001), fatigue (46.6% vs 31.2%; P < 0.001), and recent
suicidal ideation (12.7% vs 5.8%; P < 0.001). Furthermore, in
multivariate modeling, perceived errors were independently
more likely to be reported by physicians with burnout. The
  Chapter 38.   Surgeon Wellness: Scope of the Problem…    719

reverse seems to be true as well: self-perceived medical errors
were found to predict subsequent burnout [10]. Thus, there is
a direct link between patient outcomes and physician
wellness.
    Studies have looked specifically at the surgeon population
in examining these questions of wellness. One study deter-
mined that the following six factors led to increased burnout
in surgeons: having children <21 years of age; being compen-
sated purely by incentive-based pay; having a spouse as a
healthcare professional; increases in call responsibilities;
increasing years in practice; and increased number of hours
per week [11]. While having 50% or greater of time protected
was found to be protective against burnout, paradoxically,
having children of any age and increased age were also found
to be protective [11]. The survey, which had nearly 8000
respondents, reported that only 36% of surgeons felt that
their work schedule left enough time for family or personal
life, and disconcertingly, only 51% felt that they would rec-
ommend the profession to their children.
    One aspect of physician wellness decline that tends to be
overlooked is when the process begins. A recent survey of
over 3500 PGY-2 residents of all specialties revealed that
45.2% reported burnout symptoms [12]. 14.1% expressed
regret with regard to their career choice. Burnout symptoms
varied by subspecialty, but general surgery, urology, and oph-
thalmology were among the surgical subspecialties that were
associated with a higher rate of burnout. Most alarmingly,
14% would “definitely not” or “probably not” choose to
become a physician again. Perhaps we are inoculating our
trainees with wellness decline, or maybe physicians who are
exhibiting signs of burnout are modeling the behavior.
Nonetheless, attacking the problem likely requires meaning-
ful steps to intervene during residency or even medical
school, before the decline leads to depression, leaving the
profession, or, even worse, self-harm, substance abuse, or
suicide.
    In fact, a new survey of surgical residents assessed at the
time of the 2019 ABSITE examination reveals just how
720   J. R. Romanelli

prevalent wellness decline is among trainees [13]. Granted,
asking these questions at the conclusion of taking a high-­
stakes yearly examination may skew the results somewhat.
Nonetheless, the incidence of emotional exhaustion at least
once per week was 38.6%; the incidence of weekly deperson-
alization was 23.1%. Overall, 2607 general surgery residents
(43.2% of respondents) reported weekly burnout symptoms
on either of those two subscales. Worse, upon multivariate
analysis, those scoring higher on burnout scales were associ-
ated with thoughts of attrition and suicidal thoughts [13].
These data alone illuminate the crisis level of concern for
surgeon wellness decline: this is coming from our future
workforce.
    Further, we may be exacerbating the problem with a lack
of preparedness for residency. A survey done during the
2017 ABSITE examination demonstrated that 48.1% of
PGY-1 and PGY-2 respondents felt unprepared for surgical
residency [14]. Residents who took overnight call during
their third (51.6%) or fourth year (43.3%) of medical school
were more likely to feel prepared for residency. Feeling pre-
pared for residency resulted in a nearly twofold reduction in
the risk of burnout symptoms. The study concluded that
feeling unprepared for residency was related to inadequate
exposure to resident responsibilities as medical students
and that considering a change to more effective prepared-
ness may help reduce burnout symptoms among surgical
residents [14].
    In this chapter, we will attempt to look at several sentinel
causes of the decline of a physician’s wellness. We will exam-
ine topics such as unreasonable work burden, cognitive
­overload, community, victim blaming/shaming, moral injury,
 the effects of medical malpractice, autonomy, resilience, the
 role of leadership in responding to concerns of burnout, and
 EMRs, and how they contribute to the crisis of surgeon well-
 ness decline and burnout. We will also attempt to make sug-
 gestions to address the problem.
  Chapter 38.   Surgeon Wellness: Scope of the Problem…         721

Moral Injury and Victim Blaming
  “Moral injury describes the challenge of simultaneously knowing
  what care patients need but being unable to provide it due to
  constraints that are beyond our control [15].”

   The concept of moral injury has taken root to describe the
feeling that doctors are unable to provide the care they feel
their patients need. A moral injury would be an act that trans-
gresses our deeply held moral beliefs; as healthcare providers,
that belief is putting the needs of our patients first [15].
Clinicians are forced to consider the needs of other stake-
holders: the healthcare system at large; the hospital and its
attendant administrators; the insurance companies; the EMR
and its vendor; etc. When those needs trump those of our
patients, physicians “feel a sting of moral injustice. Over time,
these repetitive insults amass into moral injury” [15].
   There is not necessarily a semantic difference between
moral injury and physician burnout. As we define burnout as
the end stage of physician wellness decline, think of moral
injury as the stimulus that pushes us out of emotional inertia
and into decline. A recent publication [15] makes this distinc-
tion for another reason entirely: it reframes the problem away
from victim blaming. For example, the definitions of burnout
tend to “suggest that the problem resides within the individ-
ual… It implies that the individual lacks the resources or
resilience to withstand the work environment.” That is why
there is so much written about mindfulness, meditation, yoga,
and wellness retreats as solutions to physician wellness
decline: it serves as methods to force the individual to adapt
to the work culture. Rather, the concept of moral injury
points to system drivers of wellness decline, burnout, and
even loss of physicians from the workplace. Thus, solutions to
the problem of moral injury demand long-term changes to
the culture in which healthcare is practiced. One such exam-
ple is the reduced need for documentation in E&M coding
that began in 2021; although there was a financial impetus to
these changes, it was clear that reducing the documentation
burden on the physician was a desirable side effect.
722   J. R. Romanelli

    A recent blog by the same authors [16] expands upon this
concept. They challenge healthcare administrators to own the
problem – leaders that are willing to confront the problem
and minimize competing demands for physicians’ work time.
“Physicians must be treated with respect, autonomy, and the
authority to make rational, safe, evidence-based, and finan-
cially responsible decisions. Top-down authoritarian man-
dates on medical practice are degrading and ultimately
ineffective. We need leaders who recognize that caring for
their physicians results in thoughtful, compassionate care for
patients, which ultimately is good business…” [16]. Investing
in the wellness of physicians ultimately leads to retention of
workforce, increased productivity, and, potentially, improved
patient outcomes.
    One problem is that there is no current accepted threshold
to identify cases of moral injury [17]. Certainly, identifying
physicians who are suffering in wellness decline and a conver-
sation about identifying sources of moral injury should be part
of crafting solutions to help these physicians. Whether that
falls on departmental leaders or mental health professionals
remains a question, however. These authors also express con-
cern that “burnout (should) not become the catchall term for
emotional distress experienced by physicians.”
    Another recent and much-viewed blog [18] argues that
using the term “burnout” is not just victim blaming but victim
shaming. The author argues that using the term “burnout”
implies that physicians are “not resourceful enough, not resil-
ient enough, not strong enough, to adapt to a system….”
Further, moral injury is the result of what happens when “we
cannot give our patients the care we know that we could give
if we had the tools, and the resources, and the autonomy to do
it” [18]. He argues that moral injury is the result when our
ideals as healthcare providers clash with real-world con-
straints to medical practice. Once again, the implication is
that system changes are needed to address the crisis of physi-
cian wellness decline, rather than focusing on the victims of
the problem, and holding them accountable to adapt to the
broken culture within which they are expected to practice.
  Chapter 38.    Surgeon Wellness: Scope of the Problem…            723

Work Burden
  “Physicians have no problem going the extra mile on behalf of their
  patients as long as they know they will benefit from these activi-
  ties…. However, we now spend an incredible amount of time doing
  things not actually related to improving patient care…” [19]

   It should come as no surprise that an overwhelming work
burden can lead to physician burnout. For example, among
intensivists, workload is independently associated with the
intensity of burnout – and it is also correlated with the inten-
tion to leave one’s job [20]. Further, as we develop physician
shortages from early retirement – one study showed age
greater than 55 was a significant factor in leaving academic
medicine [21] – job change, and failing to train physicians
commensurate with population growth, resources can become
strained, adding to the feeling of an unmanageable work bur-
den. Projected nursing shortages may also push care delivery
back into the hands of physicians and advanced practice pro-
viders (APPs), adding to their daily work burden. A decrease
in available workforce can require more overnight shifts or
consecutive days or nights on call, which has also been shown
to increase burnout [20, 22]. With this opening statement in
mind, it is worth reviewing how efforts around physician
work time have changed over the last three decades.
   Resident work hours were unrestricted until the 1990s and
were, frankly, abusive. There was an expectation of in-house
overnight call responsibilities – often with a list of scores of
patients unfamiliar to the resident – and this typically
occurred once per however many same-level residents there
were at that hospital at the time. For some, this meant being
on-call every other night – typically 40 consecutive work
hours followed by 8 hours of rest, only to repeat the process
for a month or more. While change organically occurred by
the mid-1990s, with call requirements “reduced” to every
third or fourth night on-call, there was still an expectation of
normal work hours and performance “post-call.” The famous
Libby Zion case in New York City did force mandatory
changes. Libby Zion was a patient in New York Hospital in
724   J. R. Romanelli

1984, who died from a fatal reaction of Nardil and Demerol
[23]. This fatal interaction was scarcely known at the time,
and it is critical to note that the providers had no electronic
aids to understand such an interaction – all care delivery at
the time was conducted on paper. Although there was scant
evidence to make the case, the family of the deceased blamed
the error on resident overwork and lack of attending supervi-
sion of the residents involved in the case. (Of note, criminal
charges against many involved were all dropped, and the
Board of Medical Examiners in New York found that there
was no negligence involved in the case and that fatigue and
supervision were unlikely to have been involved in the case.)
[23] The State of New York did, however, mandate that resi-
dents be restricted to work “only” 80 hours per week and no
longer than 24 continuous hours. This was adopted nation-
wide in July 2003 by the ACGME, but sadly change of this
magnitude did not come from within – it came from political
pressure and lawyers. In fact, many attending surgeons
scoffed at this change, despite the fact that a limitation of
80 hours per week spread over 5 years of training would
result in 20,000 hours of training time – double what is
described as necessary by Ericsson [24] in his seminal work
on deliberate practice. Is it any wonder why many feel the
leading cause of burnout are the physicians themselves?
   Today, residents are carefully monitored for fatigue and
steps are taken to watch closely for wellness decline. Work
hour ­limitations are rigorously enforced. And medicine as a
whole has recognized that “working harder, not smarter,” is a
recipe for non-wellness. But what other factors have devel-
oped that add to this problem, and increase the physician
work burden? And how is that affecting surgeons who are
well beyond their training?
   One development over the latter part of the last decade
was the shift of complex care to larger hospitals. Gone are the
days where the mentality was “keep the patient here at all
costs.” A wide variety of complex general surgical care was
delivered – with varying rates of quality – and it was rare and
practically unheard of to recognize the need to transfer a
  Chapter 38.   Surgeon Wellness: Scope of the Problem…      725

patient to a tertiary care center. Nowadays, a recognized bile
duct injury, for example, is considered a reason to transfer to
a hepatobiliary center. Twenty years ago, this would have
been unheard of – and in fact medicolegal issues might have
hampered such a transfer despite medical appropriateness.
Further, surgeons at smaller hospitals were expected to
deliver 24-hour, 365-day-per year coverage of unassigned
emergency consultation. But envision a hospital with only
three full-time surgeons (and the workload to support that
size workforce). How sustainable is call every third night?
What about when one of them is on vacation? Surgeons
began to push back against hospital bylaws requiring such
coverage in the early 2000s, leaving these hospitals uncovered
for some nights per month. This began with requests for
transfers of simple surgical problems such as appendicitis and
cholecystitis and has morphed over the last decade and a half
into tertiary care centers often being the only night and
weekend surgical coverage for a geographic region. As one
might imagine, this has significantly impacted the work bur-
den at these centers – and it is directly leading to physician
wellness decline. Having to cover multiple hospitals at the
same time while on-call can be overwhelming, and with time
used as a critical factor in determining “delays in care” (some-
thing used against physicians in malpractice cases), there
exists an urgency to handle transfers as timely as possible.
This, too, adds to the work burden.
   Further, the expectation of normal work performance
after an overnight and weekend call shift has become patently
unrealistic, yet administrators – so protective of financial pro-
ductivity – often push back on a reduced work schedule for
surgeons after their call shift. Surgeons are often faced with
maintaining a normal elective schedule after working the
previous night, with ill-regard to outcomes. While it is undeni-
able that fatigue is a threat to patient safety, administrators
and surgical leaders have been loath to reduce schedules and
provide appropriate time for rest after off-hour shifts.
Surgeons are beginning to rethink the necessity of overnight
or weekend operating – but system issues (operating time,
726   J. R. Romanelli

length of stay issues forcing pressure for early discharge) rep-
resent an opposing force. Add to this the expectation of addi-
tional work time without compensation, and one begins to
see how burdensome night or weekend shifts can become for
surgeons over time. (To wit, try calling a plumber or a lawyer
in the middle of the night. Do you think they will be respon-
sive, and do so for free?) Perhaps it is time for a cultural
change regarding the expectations of off-hour shifts, and sur-
geons ought to be granted appropriate time for rest after
their shifts, without the guilt implied by reducing an elective
schedule to do so.
   The other consideration about work burden is the number
of administrative tasks physicians are faced with to provide
clinical care. A recent blog noted [19] “…the real damage to
us from the volume and nature of the administrative work
currently associated with patient care lies in the emotional
responses it can trigger. It can create a deeply visceral conflict
between the inherent desire and drive to do the right thing
for patients and the personal sacrifice that doing so now
involves.” It is simply astounding that as our technological
tools increase, the amount of time spent doing nonclinical
tasks has also increased, not decreased. In fact, the blog notes
that “for every hour spent on patient interaction, a physician
has an added one-to-two hours of finishing progress notes,
ordering labs, reviewing study results, prescribing medica-
tions, and completing additional documentation.” This often
bleeds into personal or family time, so much so that this phe-
nomenon is known as “pajama time” [19]. Is it any wonder
that work-life balance continues to be a struggle for physi-
cians, when patient documentation is often occurring after
hours or on weekends at home? The Center for Medicare and
Medicaid Services has recognized this and is simplifying the
amount of documentation needed to achieve certain evalua-
tion and management codes. But much work remains to
reduce the administrative burden on physicians.
   Another example that surgeons face administratively is
the need to have peer-to-peer reviews to get certain patients
approved for procedures that in many instances have defined
  Chapter 38.   Surgeon Wellness: Scope of the Problem…           727

CPT codes and that some payors routinely cover. Given that
there is no governance of private insurance companies with
regard to what cases they will and will not cover, surgeons are
often left to fight for the ability to perform the procedures
that they feel their patients need. These conversations, alleg-
edly with a “peer,” are to ostensibly argue the case for allow-
ing the procedure. Yet, almost universally, the “peer”
concludes with the statement that they are not empowered to
overturn the decision. Although the time was spent by the
surgeon advocating for their patient, it typically ends up as
time wasted, leading to frustration and anger. As the same
blog [19] notes: “It is increasingly difficult to see the benefit
to patients in needing physician approval for a wide range of
routine medical products and services for which the intended
purpose is seemingly only to manage utilization, recording an
increased volume of patient metrics that are not clearly asso-
ciated with improved clinical outcomes, and spending huge
amounts of time on insurance-related activities such as pre-­
authorizations that feel more like ‘rationing by hassle’ than a
meaningful review of medical necessity.”
   The work burden surgeons face fall into two general cate-
gories: too much or unmanageable clinical work and admin-
istrative work that does not result in any meaningful
supplementation to clinical care. While the former can result
in chronic fatigue, leading to exhaustion and wellness decline,
the latter has become a more insidious “mission creep”
­adding time to already-long hours, creating frustration and
 anger, and leading to significant wellness decline.


Cognitive Overload
  “There are two kinds of residents – those that write things down,
  and those that forget.” – William Sugarmann, MD, general sur-
  geon, Somerset, NJ.

   The amount of information a surgeon needs to know can
be staggering. At any one given time, a surgeon is expected to
know pertinent clinical details about their patients: labora-
728   J. R. Romanelli

tory results, radiology findings, inputs and outputs from the
previous 24 hours, changes to the physical examination, medi-
cal history, medications, etc. Add to this having the technical
“know-how” to perform the operations that they do in their
clinical practice. Technical errors must be avoided, and under-
standing how to avoid them is also part of the surgeon’s
knowledge base. Although a surgeon’s familiarity of key ana-
tomic landmarks resides deep in the long-term memory bank,
pattern recognition to detect aberrant anatomy is also neces-
sary. Of course, many surgeons try to stay up to date on the
latest literature that is most relevant to their clinical prac-
tice – a daunting task given the hundreds of thousands of
journal articles written per year. So how is it possible that
surgeons do not suffer from cognitive overload?
    If we harken back to resident training, endless reams of
rote learning and meaningless memorization are common-
place. Being on a team with several members – senior and
junior residents, medical students, advanced practice provid-
ers, etc. – at least one team member is always supposed to
know everything about every patient. Depending on the size
of the “service” (the quotes emphasizing the imbalance
between providing a service and receiving education) that
one is serving on at the time, the near-impossible is expected,
with scores of bits of information on dozens of patients with
data changing in real time. Surgery residents are additionally
tasked with learning everything there is to know about
­surgery (as required by the American Board of Surgery) in
 5 years (or more) of a residency program; they typically start
 with an outlined curriculum such as SCORE, but some resi-
 dency programs favor structured textbook review over a 1–2-­
 year cycle. So in between treating hundreds of patients, there
 is an expectation of an in-depth understanding of thousands
 of pages of didactic information. The very structure of surgi-
 cal resident training is laden with cognitive overload.
    With that backdrop of thought, it is worthwhile to consider
 cognitive load theory [25]. In this theory, task completion
 relies on the complex interplay between sensory inputs, long-­
 term memory acting as a repository of acquired knowledge
  Chapter 38.   Surgeon Wellness: Scope of the Problem…    729

and skills (with working memory as the intermediate stage),
acting to attribute meanings to the sensory information, and
deposit new learned information into the long-term memory.
Although sensory and long-term memories can deal with
large volumes of information, the capacity of working mem-
ory is comparatively very limited [26]. Cognitive overload is
presumed to occur when this capacity is exceeded, requiring
the individual to coordinate a larger than possible number of
elements to accomplish tasks successfully [27]. Directing the
working memory is called the metacognitive capacity of a
person, which is functionally equivalent to an individual’s
attention [28]. This sorts through sensory inputs and long-­
term knowledge to manage the overall learning process. A
physician approaching the point of cognitive overload may
begin to exhibit symptoms like depressive symptoms, with the
addition of deterioration in quality or quantity of work, rela-
tive to their own previous standard [27]. Given that, the phe-
nomenon of burnout – or, more chronically, physician wellness
decline – may be distinguished as a self-protective neuropsy-
chological response to attempting to function beyond a fixed
capacity [27]. This, as stated repeatedly in this chapter, leads
to a decline in task performance acutely, or overall perfor-
mance over a longer period. Further, an individual’s capacity
for cognitive load is fixed [27], but metacognition can be
improved with training [29]; perhaps developing programs
designed specifically for physicians to improve metacognition
can help minimize the risk of cognitive overload.
   Strategies to create supportive clinical practice environ-
ments would help physicians to reduce cognitive overload.
The well-observed pattern of surgical practice that starts
broadly and through time narrows in scope may be a self-­
protective mechanism against cognitive overload. Witness, for
example, the development of breast surgery as its own sub-
specialty distinct from surgical oncology, which, in and of
itself, became distinct from general surgery. Breast surgeons
are faced with a rapidly changing treatment paradigm based
on an overwhelming amount of literature that must be in
consideration when considering options for breast patients.
730   J. R. Romanelli

One could surmise that attempting to practice breast surgery
within the larger context of a surgical oncology practice could
lead to cognitive overload solely from the cancer data about
which they are expected to be knowledgeable. Further, some
consideration with regard to future needs of maintenance of
certification should be made with concerns of cognitive over-
load in mind. What value is there truly to study for a high-­
stakes examination asking questions about surgery well
outside the scope of the examinee’s clinical practice? And
how does that imply competence? (Clearly, the ABS agrees
given the recent development of focused-practice designation
examinations.)
   Further, the training of surgical residents should be filtered
through the lens of concern about cognitive overload. While
the days of requiring rotations in areas such as orthopedics,
neurosurgery, urology, cardiac surgery, and burn surgery have
passed, perhaps structuring learning objectives in a more
nuanced way can steer trainees away from overload and well-
ness decline. Given that the problem of physician burnout
can be traced back to medical school and residency, perhaps
the burnout crisis should serve as a clarion call to rethink the
dogmatic methodology though which we have passed down
our knowledge to the next generation of surgical trainees.


Medical Malpractice and Physician Wellness
  “There is significant research showing that coping with a medical
  malpractice suit can weigh heavily on a physician… Often physi-
  cians take the accusation of malpractice personally, and some are
  prone to symptoms of depression….” [30]

   We will begin this section with some personal perspective.
Early in my career, practicing in a private practice setting in a
highly litigious area of the United States, I was sued multiple
times in a short period of time. As a practitioner of bariatric
surgery, I was performing complicated procedures in sicker
patients, and at the time (early 2000s), medical malpractice
attorneys sought bariatric cases with zeal. These early cases –
  Chapter 38.   Surgeon Wellness: Scope of the Problem…      731

most of which were dropped – caused my malpractice rates to
spike, making it financially untenable to remain practicing in
the job and geographic area where I had been hired. The fear
of being sued (again) caused me to become risk averse. I suf-
fered from insomnia, was prone to unreasonable demonstra-
tions of anger, and spent many months considering leaving
clinical medicine altogether (despite hundreds of thousands
of dollars of educational debt). Eventually, I moved to a
hospital-employed job in a less litigious area, where I was
able to thrive and triumph over this adverse beginning to my
career. Put simply, the decline in my own wellness was visible
and palpable to anyone paying attention to the issue.
Fortunately, with counsel from trusted colleagues, support
from family and friends, and faith in my training and ability, I
was able to be rescued from this precarious position where I
could have harmed patients and suffered untold personal
costs.
    A typical physician spends 11 percent of a 40-year career
with an open malpractice claim against him or her [31]. Most
claims, from letter of intent to file suit, through interrogato-
ries, depositions, and expert testimony, to the actual court
case itself, tend to last 5–7 years, depending on the jurisdic-
tion. That means each case can last for almost 20% of a physi-
cian’s career. Even though 90% of verdicts are in favor of the
physician, being sued in a malpractice case is often a very
stressful experience, and precious little about the tort system
is beneficial or even fair to the physician. Sympathy for the
plight of the defendant physician simply does not exist, and
even victories at trial are pyrrhic at best; the doctor still
stands as accused of malfeasance, as alleged by peers.
Surgeons, as proceduralists, are more prone to lawsuit than
other specialties. Facing malpractice is virtually an inevitabil-
ity, and it can have a profound impact on surgeon wellness.
    Consider this from a recent blog [32]: “The malpractice
claim begins to affect all aspects of your life. You don’t sleep
well. You don’t interact well with family members, friends, or
colleagues. You remain dedicated to providing the best pos-
sible care, but you find yourself taking a more conservative
732   J. R. Romanelli

approach with patients, asking yourself, ‘How might this
patient attempt to sue me?’” Does this sound like a prescrip-
tion for physician wellness? Further, a doctor facing a lawsuit
is instructed by counsel or a hospital risk management
department not to discuss the case with colleagues – our typi-
cal sounding board – so we are forced to keep our feelings of
concern, insecurity, sadness, and anxiety to ourselves. The
case could be reviewed in a hospital mortality and morbidity
conference or a peer review conference, which makes the
surgeon re-live the complication or problem for which the
lawsuit is based, furthering the symptoms. And worse, in some
states, those conferences are discoverable, hampering their
effectiveness in learning from error.
   Medical malpractice comes with a significant cost to the
healthcare system. This is not meant to defend or deny that
medical errors kill nearly 100,000 of patients per year [33],
and error prevention is the hallmark of any surgical quality
program. But as physicians are under the constant threat of
malpractice, we tend to over-order tests, radiology studies,
and consultations. Defensive medicine, as it has been termed,
adds tens of millions of dollars to the cost of delivering
healthcare, and adds to a physician’s already overwhelming
work burden, which, as described elsewhere in this chapter, is
a significant contributor to physician wellness decline.
Further, risk-aversive behavior can develop, whereby s­ urgeons
decline to care for complicated patients or refer patients to
tertiary care facilities to care for problems that do not in and
of itself require their presence at such a facility. Since it is
well-described that each procedure that we perform itera-
tively informs our future procedures, bad outcomes or experi-
ences can negatively drive behavior away from repeating the
same mistake, even if it is in the best interest of the patient.
Such avoidant care can further increase healthcare costs, add
to physician stress and dissatisfaction, and cause unintended
harm or poor outcomes for patients.
   There even exists a named syndrome for the litigation
stress caused by a malpractice lawsuit: medical malpractice
stress syndrome (MMSS) [34]. This syndrome is described as
  Chapter 38.   Surgeon Wellness: Scope of the Problem…     733

having symptoms like post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
Feelings of anger, despair, embarrassment, or stress are com-
monplace. It can manifest severe psychological symptoms, as
well as physical symptoms, and can affect not just patient care
delivery but personal life outside of the hospital. Furthermore,
the anxiety generated by MMSS alone can lead to subsequent
medical errors [34].
   While avoiding medical malpractice is impossible in the
delivery of surgical care, strategies to mitigate risk, avoid
technical errors, manage complications, and continue lifelong
learning can reduce the chances of being named in a lawsuit.
Seeking professional support to cope with the stress of litiga-
tion is essential to preventing wellness decline. Building
departmental systems such as peer support can also be a
helpful adjunct to preventing MMSS or simply the personal
stress generated by untoward patient outcomes.


Physician Autonomy and Wellness
  “When doctors used to play golf on Wednesday afternoons, I
  didn’t hear them talking about burnout.” – Anonymous

   One concept that is gaining attention is whether a loss of
physician autonomy has become a factor in wellness decline.
Certainly, the burden of administrative tasks – of which the
physician has little control over and is required to complete –
is a major factor in dissatisfaction, as has been well docu-
mented. But could the underlying reason really be a loss of
control or autonomy? Consider how the scope of medicine
has changed in recent decades and the parallel decline in
physician wellness.
   Decades ago, most physicians were in private practice.
Surgeons booked as many cases as they wished to do. They
saw patients in offices or clinics as needed to keep the OR
schedule full. Time could be allocated to academic pursuit,
education, or personal time as desired. Productivity was
driven primarily by income and keeping referral pipelines
flowing. While surgeons had to follow hospital bylaws and
734   J. R. Romanelli

rules governing the operating room, there was very little
oversight into the conduct of their medical practices. The pri-
vate practice model allowed surgeons to work in competing
healthcare systems, forcing the hospital administrative staff to
cater to these physicians and curry favor with them or risk
losing their business to the competition.
    Fast forward to the modern era, where most surgeons are
multispecialty group-employed or hospital-employed, and
the private practice model is disappearing. Gone are the days
whereby surgeons operated in competing hospitals in a com-
munity. Many compensation packages are based solely on
productivity, with negative ramifications for failing to meet
wRVU targets that are often not feasible. Time for academic
pursuit and education is shrinking in the name of furthering
productivity. Hospital administrative staff has a little role in
helping the physicians achieve their goals. EMR use has
become mandatory even on the outpatient side of patient
care, and the many rules, inbox messages, laboratory, and
X-ray results that must be addressed in the name of meeting
medical record goals are often excessive. Physician time is
completely controlled, and time for an afternoon of nonhos-
pital social activity – even if it is done with referring physi-
cians (i.e., helping to build a business relationship) – results in
a deduction of hours from a personal time off bank. In short,
in the name of practice stability and income guarantee,
­surgeons have forfeited autonomy, and this may have played
 a role in the general decline of physician wellness.
    According to basic psychological needs theory [35], three
 innate human needs – autonomy, competence, and related-
 ness – should be supported by a work environment for indi-
 viduals to experience optimal development, functioning, and
 well-being. A recent study by Walter and Kono [36] has
 shown that the need for autonomy had the largest positive
 effect on work satisfaction. In addition, the need for related-
 ness was also shown to be of importance, although the effect
 of competence was nonsignificant. This study was conducted
 outside of medicine but is relevant, nonetheless. A similar
 study [37] conducted with physicians in Canada determined
  Chapter 38.   Surgeon Wellness: Scope of the Problem…   735

relatedness to be the most important factor in professional
well-being, although the physicians in this study had a high
degree of autonomy and thus the author concluded that it
played less of a role. Interestingly, one factor which has
become a common buzzword for administrators is “engage-
ment,” and this study demonstrated that only relatedness had
a positive effect on physician engagement. One way of fram-
ing this concept is to ask: is the work burden related to that
which drives the physicians’ well-being and satisfaction (i.e.,
patient care)? It can explain why overburdening physicians
with administrative tasks (not related) can cause a loss of
engagement and wellness decline.
   A recent blog [38] listed five factors that have resulted in
a loss of physician autonomy: insurance companies; middle-
men such as pharmacy benefit managers (PBMs) or group
purchasing organizations (GPOs); EMRs; government
reporting and pay-for-performance; and physician replace-
ment by lesser trained/qualified individuals. Insurance com-
panies often dictate rules and regulations by which physicians
must practice for them to cover a service or prescription.
Consider what bariatric surgeons must do to gain authoriza-
tion or how the concept of “mission creep” regarding prior
authorization has been corrupted into nonevidence-based
prescribing practices that take the decision out of the physi-
cians’ hands. The surgeon has little autonomy with regard to
patient care decisions that are not filtered through the hands
of a nonphysician at a third-party insurance company. PBMs
and GPOs force surgeons into prescribing drugs that are “on
formulary” and to use equipment in the operating room that
is under contract, regardless of surgeon experience or com-
fort with the product. EMRs are covered in another section
of this chapter. Quality reporting and the pressure of non-­
compensation for poor performance may take more clinical
decision-making out of the hands of physicians, and greatly
contribute to the loss of autonomy. Lastly, the explosion of
advanced practice providers (APPs) may contribute to lower
physician wages, as much of what a surgeon can do has
recently been assumed by APPs, who typically are paid less
736   J. R. Romanelli

than a physician. The blog [38] comments that administrators
lump physicians and APPs together by calling all of us “pro-
viders,” obscuring training and deceiving the public into the
thinking that the care delivered is equivalent without any
evidence that this is indeed the case. Nonetheless, an unin-
tended consequence is stripping another layer of satisfaction
away from physicians, and this too may contribute to wellness
decline.
   In 2011, 65% of physicians felt that the future of health-
care would see a decline in quality, largely due to a loss of
autonomy [39]. Such was this concern that there were pro-
grams built into the Affordable Care Act designed to enhance
physician autonomy… but at increased financial risk (and as
such was born the concept of population health). While cost
accountability should be part of any attempt at healthcare
reform, dangling autonomy in exchange for financial risk
leaves physicians in between two undesirable choices, leading
to a decrease in satisfaction and reduced performance. While
many initiatives with regard to technology, public quality
reporting, increases in clinical volume, or new local standards
are designed around patient safety and quality care delivery,
the additional burdens placed on physicians lead to feelings
of burnout and reduce the success of the initiatives [40].
   Another recent example of loss of physician autonomy is
the controversy over operating room attire, which is covered
in detail in Chap. 49. While many decried the lack of evidence
driving the AORN’s 2015 recommendation to remove skull-
caps from operating rooms (and newer evidence has led them
to drop the recommendation altogether), surgeons also forc-
ibly pushed back on the recommendations, seeing this as a
loss of autonomy. As the American College of Surgeons
stated in 2017, the skullcap is symbolic of the surgical profes-
sion. While the type of operating room head covering has
never been associated specifically with surgeon wellness, the
volume of the outcry and tone of the response spoke to the
offense of the reduction in autonomy.
   Loss of physician autonomy has clearly led to a decline in
physician wellness, and considerations to large-scale change
  Chapter 38.   Surgeon Wellness: Scope of the Problem…           737

to address the burnout issue should focus on a meaningful
restoration of physician autonomy.


Resilience
  “Resilience is the collection of personal qualities that enable a
  person to adapt well and even thrive in the face of adversity and
  stress… Given the intensity of the (physician training process),
  resilience might be expected to be greater among practicing phy-
  sicians than among workers in other careers….” [41].

   Resilience is a topic often referred to in scholarly writing
about physician burnout. While often defined as the collec-
tion of personal qualities that enable a person to adapt well
and even thrive in the face of adversity and stress [41], the
physical definition bears consideration: the capability of a
strained body to recover its shape after deformation caused
especially by stress. Recovery from stress, then, would be a
way of framing how the concept of resilience applies to physi-
cian wellness. While it may seem sensible to associate the two
ideas, the connection strains credibility when placed into the
context of physician training.
   Medical training is rigorous from the outset. It can begin in
undergraduate studies with “weed out” courses such as
organic chemistry, which often have endless memorization
tasks and a near-unbearable knowledge load – all with the
payoff that one may never utilize the information learned in
their studies ever again. In medical school this can be multi-
plied, and this is among the reasons that many medical stu-
dents report signs of burnout [42]. The learning burden is
immense; and the hours spent studying, learning, and training
can lead to social isolation, lack of meaningful relationships,
and delay in starting families. Medical students are even
taught to deny personal needs such as sleep and food, all in
the name of service to patients [43] – and often disguised
under the trope of “learning opportunities.” (Witness the first
two of the unofficial “rules of surgery”: “Eat when you can,”
and “Sleep when you can.”) Surgical residents are forced to
738   J. R. Romanelli

learn an academic curriculum consisting of thousands of
pages of textbook material; learn to read and critically
appraise medical literature, which expands by thousands of
scholarly articles per day; and perform well over a thousand
operations in 5 or more years – all while taking care of scores
of patients on “services” (note the use of the term again) on
limited sleep, erratic and excessive work hours, and often
unreasonable expectations of learning. One can make a very
fair argument that physicians have well-developed resilience
skills as they face difficulties daily and stress is near-constant
in what they do. Thus, the argument that physicians need to
improve their resilience to prevent wellness problems is nei-
ther credible nor particularly helpful.
   Further, the concept of self-sacrifice in the name of service
can lead to personal exhaustion – one of the hallmarks of
burnout – and this expectation of sacrifice can be extended to
the families of physicians [43]. Over time, this can lead to the
struggle of work-life balance, that is, having to choose
between patients and personal/family time. This can be addi-
tionally stressful for female physicians, who report higher
rates of burnout than do their male colleagues [6, 41], and
higher rates of divorce among physicians [44]. While many
suggestions for physicians to avoid burnout speak of reserv-
ing professional time for family activities – e.g., canceling
patient slots in one’s schedule to attend a children’s sporting
event or artistic performance – this presumes that there exists
enough professional autonomy to make such sacrifices. The
author of this chapter personally witnessed this during fel-
lowship training when his mentor would arrange surgical
schedules around his son’s hockey games; that mentor was
the chair of an academic department of surgery and as such
was granted the autonomy to control his schedule in such a
manner. While he modeled an admirable work-life balance,
most physicians do not have the autonomy to arrange their
schedules in such a way. To wit, how much conversation was
there about physician burnout in the era of “doctors playing
golf on Wednesday afternoons”?
  Chapter 38.   Surgeon Wellness: Scope of the Problem…    739

   Additionally, in the practice of medicine, there exists the
expectation of excellence and that our clinical results asymp-
totically approach perfection. Infinite reservoirs of knowl-
edge and memory are demanded of our trainees, and zero
tolerance for mistakes is commonplace [43]. While this con-
cept leads to perfectionism, it leaves little room for accep-
tance of error, and learning from clinical mistakes. The
omnipresent concern of sanction from internal or external
bodies (in the name of “quality”), criticism from colleagues,
and threat of malpractice hanging over physicians like a
sword of Damocles leaves physicians with a fear of making a
mistake that can lead to defensive medical practices, and feel-
ings of inadequacy when mistakes inevitably occur. Further,
our medical culture is still not comfortable with conversation
(without repercussions) of error or patient harm as we often
lack safe venues for meaningful discussion. Physicians are
often forced to “move on to the next patient” without ade-
quate time to heal from the painful feelings that arise from
patient errors or deaths, and one can safely argue that they
are highly dependent on resilience skills to do so.
   A recent study looked at the association of resilience and
burnout and reported important results to consider [41]. Not
only do physicians exhibit higher levels of resilience than the
general working population in the United States, but resil-
ience was inversely associated with burnout symptoms. In
other words, physicians with higher resilience scores scored
lower in emotional exhaustion and depersonalization subdo-
mains in the Maslach Burnout Index [5, 41]. So, while it would
seem that resilience skills would be protective against burn-
out, the paper warns that “symptoms of burnout were com-
mon even among physicians with the highest possible
resilience score” [41]. Further, “although efforts to maintain
or strengthen resilience are appropriate… this approach
aligns with evidence to date supporting equal or greater
effectiveness of organizational solutions to reduce burnout”
[41] rather than emphasis on the individual to improve skill
sets in an effort to combat wellness decline.
740    J. R. Romanelli

    Physicians are endowed with remarkable resilience skills –
and one can argue from the rigor of training that surgeons are
near the top in developing this skill. The suggestion that burn-
out is a result of resilience failure is not only lacking in credibil-
ity, but it tends toward blaming the victim, rather than focusing
on system issues that are the true drivers of wellness decline.


EMRs and Wellness
   “The average workday for its family physicians ha(s) grown to
   eleven and a half hours. The result has been epidemic levels of
   burnout among clinicians…. Something’s gone terribly wrong.”
   – Atul Gawande [45]

    The widespread adoption of EMRs into clinical practice is
often blamed for a decline in physician wellness. And while it
is true that dealing with the rigors of electronic documenta-
tion can be a frustrating experience – and a dissatisfier for
patients, who often feel that their doctor is talking to a com-
puter rather than talking to the patient – there can be no
dispute that the technological advancement is a positive for
the practice of clinical medicine. Gone are the days of illegi-
ble scribble being accepted as medical documentation or,
worse, medical errors due to indecipherable order writing.
And while many surgeons yearn for the days of yore with
five-line progress notes inscribed in fluent abbreviation while
stating nothing of consequence, there can be no dispute that
electronic documentation had enhanced the readability of
daily documentation in the patient’s chart.
    This is not to suggest that EMRs are a vast improvement.
The notes that appear in charts are often several pages long,
laden with automatically included data that clutters the note
and makes the utility of the note decline. Medical records
from lengthy hospitalizations have ballooned to thousands of
pages simply with the “note diarrhea” that has become so
prevalent. In many cases, the workload to create electronic
documentation, especially in academic settings with trainees
trying to document under time constraints, forces “copy-and-­
  Chapter 38.   Surgeon Wellness: Scope of the Problem…    741

paste” behavior, which perpetuates information that can be
inaccurate, is no longer timely, or may lead to false impres-
sions about a patient’s progress (not to mention that it is
illegal per CMS guidelines). Many physicians complain that
the EMR documentation system is subpar and that the EMR
itself masquerades as a billing system. Others state, often cor-
rectly, that these systems were designed with minimal end-­
user input with the frustrating expectation that physicians
would change their workflow to suit the program, rather than
designing the program to suit physician needs while minimiz-
ing workflow changes. Is it any wonder that EMRs are
blamed for the decline in physician wellness?
    A recent survey that examined physician wellness in depth
[7] did look at EMRs as a cause for burnout. There were
important findings elucidated in this survey; regarding EMRs,
there is a clear generational divide. Unsurprisingly, the group
that reported the most difficulty with EMRs was the Baby
Boomer group, which may imply less facility with computer-
ized programs and technology in general. For example, 41%
of Baby Boomers reported increasing computerization of
practice as a contributor to a decline in wellness, but only
17% of Millennials did so. EMRs were the second lowest cited
factor for burnout symptoms in the Millennial group. One
can argue, then, that this problem should decline as a factor
as Baby Boomers inch closer to retirement, and the younger
workforce, already facile with technology, perhaps will view
this less of an impediment to work completion. Overall,
EMRs actually placed fourth overall in the survey [7] as a
cause of burnout with 30% of physicians reporting it is a
cause of wellness decline, behind other factors such as too
many bureaucratic tasks (55%), total work hours (33%), and
lack of respect from colleagues, administration, and staff
(32%).
    Numerous scholarly publications have ruminated on
EMRs as a cause for physician burnout. One recent paper
[46] has a quote that is informative: “[EMRs] contribute to
burnout by turning physicians into unhappy data-entry clerks,
and also by enabling 24-hour patient access without any sys-
742   J. R. Romanelli

tem to provide compensation or coverage.” A study by the
RAND corporation [47] about physician professional satis-
faction looked in depth at EMRs. Stating that EMRs were “a
source of both promise and frustration,” physicians in this
survey did approve of EMRs in concept and appreciated the
ability to remotely access patient information. Physicians also
defined EMRs as an improvement in the quality of care. On
the other hand, aspects of EMRs that routinely negatively
affected satisfaction included “poor usability, time-­consuming
data entry, interference with face-to-face patient care, ineffi-
cient and less fulfilling work content, inability to exchange
health information, and degradation of clinical documenta-
tion.” Another recent study [48] ranked the usability (based
on a standardized score to rank usability of software) of
EMRs and found them to be rated a software usability score
(SUS) of 45.9/100 – which is in the “not acceptable” range or
a grade of “F.” To compare, Excel, which is widely panned as
difficult and unwieldy to use, scored a 57 (low marginal
acceptability range but also a grade of F). This speaks to the
drastic need to create future iterations of EMR technology
with significant provider input to make them more usable.
The authors state as such: “Given the association between
EHR usability and physician burnout, improving EHR
usability may be an important approach to help reduce health
care professional burnout.” This study also showed that older
physicians were more likely to rate EMRs as less usable. It
also demonstrated that physicians working in academic medi-
cal centers rated their EMR less favorably. Most concern-
ingly, “EHR usability scores were strongly and independently
associated with physician burnout in a dose-response rela-
tionship. The odds of burnout were lower for each 1 point
more favorable SUS score, a finding that persisted after
adjusting for an extensive array of other personal and profes-
sional characteristics.” Data such as these should be sounding
a clarion call to hospital administrators and software compa-
nies that physicians need better technology, but that has yet
to occur. Even the Affordable Care Act includes a provision
regarding interoperability of EMRs (another source of physi-
  Chapter 38.   Surgeon Wellness: Scope of the Problem…      743

cian frustration), but in almost a decade since its passage, lit-
tle tangible progress has been made on that front.
   Famed author and surgeon Atul Gawande wrote an essay
for the New Yorker [45] entitled “Why Doctors Hate Their
Computers,” which looks at the humanistic aspect of the
EMR frustration for physicians. One quote stands out as a
wonderful summation of the problem: “I’ve come to feel that
a system that promised to increase my mastery over my work
has, instead, increased my work’s mastery over me.” He also
commented on a study [49] that demonstrated that physicians
spent almost 2 hours doing computer work for every hour
spent with a patient and that documentation tasks are often
done after hours from home. “The result has been epidemic
levels of burnout among clinicians,” writes Gawande. One
colleague of the author stated that the extra time spent docu-
menting was not the concern – the pointlessness of doing the
task in the ways required was what bothered her the most.
Gawande also comments on how mundane but necessary
tasks like medication refills or letters to patients – tradition-
ally performed by office staff – often must be done by physi-
cians, adding to the feeling of administrative overburden.
   An article published in the New England Journal of
Medicine Catalyst [50] examined the relationship between
EMRs and burnout. There are revealing comments in this
article that help to point toward the association with EMR
design, physician workflow, and frustration. Once concept is
alert fatigue – where physicians often see so many “alerts” that
do not have clinical relevance that they miss alerts that are
critically important. “Often, there are so many of these best
practice alerts (requiring physician work to address them) that
the clinicians just bypass them.” Another comment summa-
rizes the thoughts of many physicians: “What has happened
over time is we have asked our clinicians to become sophisti-
cated coders. They are clicking through screens that are clut-
tered, that are not designed with human factors in mind. They
are filling out forms that at one time would have been triaged
to a medical assistant or health assistant. They’re having to
respond in their inbox to messages that otherwise historically
744   J. R. Romanelli

would not have come to their inbox, that would have been fil-
tered away, and so it literally has added work to a busy day….”
The authors conclude that a solution to the problem would be
for “designers of EMRs to try and work to improve the user
interface, the workflow, in a way similar to the way smart-
phones work or when you start a search on a search engine and
it almost anticipates your needs. We’re just behind. We’re
almost in generation one of that electronic medical record….”
   One risk in blaming the EMRs as the main source of physi-
cian burnout is that administrators may focus on the physical
concept of a “thing” causing the dissatisfaction, rather than
the issue at hand: less-efficient workflow caused by electronic
documentation requirements. In other words, blaming the
computer for physician wellness decline misses the point
entirely. We believe that EMRs are a different method to
document and communicate, but that surgeons must strive to
enhance their own personal workflow within the system to
find efficiency. All systems are rife with inefficiency; the
author of this chapter recalls clearly spending hours search-
ing for patient charts on the floors during weekend rounds, as
opposed to the current state of sitting at a computer and sign-
ing many notes all at once. It is unquestionably faster and
more efficient now. We believe the key to minimizing the
frustration with EMRs is to become stakeholders – have
input in design of templated notes, order sets, etc. – to make
the computer conform to the workflow of a best practice
standard. The entire field of medical informatics is develop-
ing rapidly to marry the software coders and clinicians
together to help make the use of the EMR less burdensome.
Over time, this should minimize frustration and lessen the
contribution toward physician burnout.


 eadership Perspective: How to Handle
L
Burnout in a Department
  “Choose a job that you love, and you will never a work a day in
  your life.” – Confucius
   Chapter 38.   Surgeon Wellness: Scope of the Problem…       745

   The first and most obvious thought about a surgeon who
has declining wellness is for others to be cognizant of the
symptoms. Surgical department chairs, division chiefs, or even
senior partners in private practices should be constantly on
the lookout for the partner or colleague who is not doing
well. External signs such as visible stigmata of fatigue, poor
grooming, and a downward trajectory in attitude or overall
happiness should be calls for attention to the situation. A pat-
tern of surgical outcomes that deviates from the expected in
a confined period of time should at least provoke the ques-
tion of wellness. Downturns in productivity without a precipi-
tating event should also prompt questions about whether or
not the surgeon is exhibiting other signs of burnout. Of
course, this responsibility should not only rely on surgical
leadership but rather be the responsibility of everyone in a
group as a whole. The trite expression “A rising tide rises all
boats” certainly rings true in this instance.
   Gaining an understanding of what the fears of surgeons
are can be extraordinarily helpful to surgical leaders. In the
Virtual SAGES Annual Meeting of 2020, there was a session
entitled “Putting Out the Fire: Time to Burn the Burnout.” In
this session, Dr. Mark Talamini, a former SAGES president,
who served as a department chair at multiple institutions,
addressed this directly in his talk entitled: “The Principals of
Burnout” [51]. Dr. Talamini stated that the job of the chair is
to “create jobs that your faculty will love, and you can avoid
some of the burnout/disruption/wellness issues that can
arise.” Further, he stresses that a critical goal of surgical lead-
ers is to serve as a coach for the faculty – to assess his/her
surgeons, learn their strengths and weakness, help to accentu-
ate their strengths, try to address their weaknesses, and advise
when “fixing” isn’t possible and help them to move on to a
position better suited to their talents. Also, in this lecture, Dr.
Talamini refers to Marcus Buckingham’s book, The One
Thing You Need to Know: About Great Managing, Great
Leading, and Sustained Individual Success [52]. Dr. Talamini
discusses the five fears of surgeons in this talk, and the five
solutions leaders need to address these fears. He states that
746   J. R. Romanelli

the leader’s role is to determine which of the fears applies to
each surgeon under their command, and to work toward rec-
ognition of these issues. Namely, he discussed the fears of
death, being an outsider, the future, chaos, and insignificance.
Each of these fears has corresponding needs from leaders to
address them. Fear of death, despite the melodramatic tim-
bre, is really about the fear of having an inability to provide
for oneself and their family. It raises questions of economic
security. While not common among surgeons based on typical
incomes, this can become an issue in productivity-driven
compensation situations. The need from the leader is to pro-
vide security. Assuring surgeons that their employment is not
threatened if certain financial goals are not met can reduce a
stressor that could lead to burnout. Fear of being an outsider
is often framed by an individual as “Am I part of this group?”
The need for the leader to provide is a sense of community.
Inclusiveness in a department or division can avoid corrosive
relationships that can damage the psyche of a group and
serves as a threat to overall success. It is important for all
leaders to recognize the importance of developing a commu-
nity so that common goals can be developed and shared. Fear
of the future is often asked as “What is going to happen?”
Certainly, during the COVID-19 pandemic, many of us have
faced this fear, and it is frustrating for many to not have the
answer to this question. The need for the leader is to provide
clarity in their leadership style; clarity about where the
department, division, or practice is going; where they hope to
be in subsequent years; how growth will occur; and what
needs to happen to achieve it. Mapping out what the future
will look like for a surgeon helps to avoid wellness decline if
she or he can see the path to accomplish what was mapped
out. The fear of chaos is really rooted in questions of author-
ity: “Whom do I answer to?” Many surgeons are pulled in
several directions and the chain of command can become
confusing. Do they only answer to the chairman? To the CEO
or CMO? For surgical oncologists, do they answer to the
director of the cancer center? Having a clear chain of com-
mand can avoid departmental chaos, and this can serve as an
  Chapter 38.   Surgeon Wellness: Scope of the Problem…      747

insidious cause of stress of surgeons. Lastly, the fear of insig-
nificance can overwhelm physicians, although Dr. Talamini
points out that surgeons are the least likely to suffer from this
because each operation that we perform is a significant, tan-
gible event in the care of a patient. One can imagine that
emergency medicine providers, primary care physicians, or
hospitalists struggle with this – with a never-ending list of
patients, lengthy tasks to be completed in the EMRs, seeming
like they are constantly behind in time, etc. The leader’s role
is to provide respect: assurance that what that physician does
matters, reinforcing how important they are to the depart-
ment, telling him or her that their job performance is excel-
lent. In short, the “Attaboy!” comments make a difference.
    The goal of the surgical leader is to sense when the col-
league is straying from the clinical path that was created
together, and this seems to be congruent with wellness
decline. Understanding the drivers of stress and gaining the
trust of the colleague to have open and honest discussion
about their issues represents an important step toward well-
ness rescue. Of course, identifying concerns of mental illness
is critical, and the use of the institution’s employee assistance
program can aid in helping the surgeon in wellness decline.


Putting out the Fire: Burning the Burnout
  “The best defense is a good offense.” – Jack Dempsey

   So how does one move forward given the scope of this
crisis of physician wellness? Obviously, solutions are far
beyond the scope of a book chapter, but there are many items
touched upon that can help lead us to a better understanding
of the problem. It is incumbent upon physicians, especially
physician leaders, administrators, and all concerned to recog-
nize the magnitude of the problem and the threat that it
serves to the physician workforce. Physician suicide is far too
common, and tragic in every single instance. Attrition due to
non-wellness and early retirements take talented, experi-
enced physicians out of the workplace. And wellness decline
748   J. R. Romanelli

can start very early in a physician’s career, even as soon as
medical school. So clearly, we at a minimum need to be atten-
tive to the issue from the very beginning of training.
    First, we as physicians need to better define the problem.
As previously stated, burnout is the end stage of a spectrum
of wellness; a better term that is both more descriptive and
less judgmental than the term “burnout” is “physician well-
ness decline.” Burnout implies a status from which one can-
not recover; this is simply not the case in most physicians.
Rather, appropriate intervention can produce wellness res-
cue, and this should be the singular goal in all situations of
physician decline. Others prefer the concept of “moral
injury,” as “burnout” is a term that could be seen as blaming
the victim as opposed to examining system issues that are
driving the decline. Moral injury refers to the negative feel-
ings that arise when physicians cannot care for their patients
due to system issues. As discussed in this chapter, many sys-
tem issues can lead to moral injury, be it limitations of elec-
tronic medical records, rules by third-party insurance
companies, administrative burden, etc. So, clarity in definition
is a necessary first step.
    Second, a good baseline to move back to is to try and find
the joy in surgery. Why did the physician become a surgeon in
the first place? What drew her to the field? What makes him
happy at work? What stressors are preventing them from
finding joy? As discussed in a recent publication [53], “a para-
digm shift in the profession of surgery would facilitate the
rediscovery and reinvigoration of joy among surgeons and
their family, friends, patients, and learners.” This would
require buy-in not only from surgeon leaders but all practic-
ing surgeons. This could serve as an offensive maneuver to
combat wellness decline – to shift surgeons in the positive
direction on the wellness spectrum. The Institute for
Healthcare Improvement published a white paper in 2017
focused on this topic [54]. They identified a four-step process
to reintroduce joy to the work environment. The first step is
to ask surgeons what matters to them. This gets at the heart
of their internal motivation. But it can also help to identify
   Chapter 38.   Surgeon Wellness: Scope of the Problem…       749

what drives their wellness in the negative direction. For
example, if colorectal surgeons are forced to take call for
general surgery or trauma surgery, these surgeons might be
forced to deliver care they are unaccustomed to providing or
to perform operations they are not comfortable performing.
What matters to them might be to stop taking such call and
to focus on building their colorectal practices. The second
step is to identify unique impediments. In the above example,
it is achieving the desired result of not taking general/trauma
call because of a lack of providers to cover the calls with
enough time to rest and recover between calls. These colorec-
tal surgeons might want to take call for colorectal surgery
only but defining what would be “colorectal” could be con-
tentious and fracture a department into subgroups with com-
peting interests. The third step is to commit to a systems
approach. This requires forming a multidisciplinary team to
examine how to remove impediments to joy. For example,
imagine a team where non-surgeons looked at the above
issue; they examined how many patients are received on call,
who else might be able to cover call (community surgeons?),
how many colorectal patients would be expected per call, etc.
Sometimes, working outside of the “silos” we tend to form in
surgery can offer innovative solutions to difficult problems.
The last step is to use improvement science ­methodology to
track, study, and share improvements with all key stakehold-
ers [53, 54]. Creating quality improvement projects around
thorny issues that drive wellness in the negative direction
could be a creative way of tackling the problems and finding
a path back to joy in a surgical department.
    Third, learning how to thrive in a constrained environ-
ment, while not necessarily a demonstration of resilience
skills, is critical to not allowing limitations in care delivery to
become drivers on non-wellness. As an example, look at the
EMR. Rather than seeing the computer as the enemy, view it
as a technological advance that helps to prevent medical
errors. I chose to embrace electronic documentation by work-
ing with our informatics team to develop note templates that
made my workflow faster and more efficient. I did so by
750   J. R. Romanelli

automating anything that was repetitive in any way. As one
might imagine, in a practice heavy on bariatrics, creating tem-
plates to cover preoperative and postoperative bariatric
patients would go a long way toward aiding the surgeon with
documentation. I view this as “making lemonade out of life’s
lemons,” but it never moved my wellness negatively on the
spectrum. It is true that we cannot force massive system
changes such as the health insurance system, accreditation
requirements, coding and billing rules, or hospital bylaws sim-
ply to provide improvement to physician wellness. But learn-
ing how to function within the boundaries – and then building
and establishing a “comfort zone” – will go a long way toward
not letting system issues induce feelings of burnout.
   Fourth, I think a good faith attempt to balance productiv-
ity and appropriate rest is a prescription to financial health of
a division or department and physical wellness of the work-
force. It is without dispute that fatigue is a threat to patient
care and overnight call can produce fatigue that can last for
several days. As the surgical workforce ages in a department
or group, recovery from disrupted sleep may take longer, and
thus surgical leaders need to be cognizant of fatigue issues
provoked by taking overnight call. For example, should elec-
tive work be scheduled the day after a 24-hour call shift? Are
those surgeons best equipped to manage their patients
safely? Are they as cognitively attuned to threats to patient
safety as they would be if well-rested? How much productiv-
ity must be sacrificed to allow for time off – and wouldn’t this
be recaptured by a well-rested and thus more productive
workforce? Gone are the days of the “suck it up” method of
fatigue management. Emotional wellness is an impossible
dream for surgeons if a lack of physical wellness permeates a
department. Eating well, exercising, and other healthy
endeavors to address stress in the workplace are difficult to
achieve when chronically fatigued. So, an important strategy
to combat physician wellness decline is to assure adequate
rest and maintenance of physical wellness. Another strategy
to consider would be to provide paid time off for each period
of overnight or weekend call. This might allow surgeons to
  Chapter 38.   Surgeon Wellness: Scope of the Problem…     751

relax and refresh and come to work reinvigorated. Further,
strategies to work smarter – and not harder – should be
implemented. For example, is it necessary to perform all
appendectomies immediately upon presentation? Should
they still be performed in the middle of the night, when there
is ample evidence that waiting until morning in the absence
of peritonitis does not worsen outcomes? Wouldn’t the out-
comes theoretically improve if the surgeon was well-rested?
Granted, system issues such as operating room availability
and a clear schedule for the post-call surgeon would be neces-
sary impediments to this process, but the dogmatic thought of
“all appendectomies are surgical emergencies” should not
only fall victim to evidence to the contrary but an effort to
work smarter and gain valuable rest for the surgeon.
   Last, we must remember that we are doctors committed to
helping others. While in general that refers to patient care, we
must not lose sight over the responsibility to care for one
another. To extinguish burnout, we must strive to create a
culture of accountability; part of our responsibility should be
to make sure our partners, colleagues, and fellow caregivers
are well. When one of our colleagues begins to slide in the
negative direction on the wellness spectrum, we must take
active steps to help. These could be small steps like recogniz-
ing fatigue in a colleague and offering to help offload the
work burden by changing call assignments, scrubbing them
out of a long operation, or being a friendly voice to listen
when they need to vent their frustrations. A former colleague
of mine, now retired, served that role for many years in my
department, and he personally taught me how to listen to my
colleagues – an important and often neglected skill for physi-
cians. We must create a community that is inclusive, where
everyone helps to get the work finished. That might mean
creative solutions to handle the work burden that may repre-
sent a disruptive change – recognizing that some of those
solutions might fail. Such a community must also beware of
the negative power of inertia and acknowledge the natural
resistance to change. We must be aware of implicit biases,
even regarding how we interact with each other as colleagues,
752   J. R. Romanelli

and to avoid microaggressions which quickly lead to feelings
that produce a negative move on the wellness spectrum.
Healthcare administrators should seek to be part of the solu-
tion by avoiding victim blaming, using multidisciplinary
teams to creatively solve difficult system issues which drive
non-­wellness, and learning what problems are really plaguing
physicians. They must be committed to implementing mean-
ingful change to help improve wellness, and they should
encourage department leaders to keep “wellness report
cards” on its staff, so that there is attention to the problem on
a regular basis with mechanisms to address those that are
failing.


Conclusion
Surgeon burnout represents an existential threat to the deliv-
ery of high-quality surgical care. Although drivers of physi-
cian wellness decline are multifactorial, and certainly vary
between different subspecialties of medicine, gaining an
understanding as to how physicians begin to become unhappy
in their jobs is crucial to addressing this crisis. We must begin
by looking at drivers of non-wellness in our future workforce
and strategize creative solutions to these issues with careful
consideration of reform of surgical training. Leaders should
be committed to building a pathway toward joy in their
departments. We must recognize that physicians of all special-
ties are resilient enough – and that mindfulness and medita-
tion are not realistic tools to address feelings of
depersonalization, emotional exhaustion, or reduced per-
sonal accomplishment. We must grant physicians the auton-
omy necessary to improve their workflow, and we must audit
their work burden and take meaningful steps to address it
when it becomes overwhelming. This includes taking a careful
look at how overnight and weekend call responsibilities are
mitigated. Steps to prevent cognitive overload – either by
overhauling surgical training for physicians new to the pro-
fession or reducing board accreditation requirements – need
   Chapter 38.          Surgeon Wellness: Scope of the Problem…                               753

for continuing medical education, and the need to stay cur-
rent in their area of surgery, perhaps with technological inno-
vation, should be taken to ensure a healthy surgical workforce.
Issues of medical malpractice should be handled with sensi-
tivity of how they affect physicians emotionally, and risk
management teams should incorporate systems to gauge
physician wellness in the response to claims. The use and
implementation of EMRs should be strategized with work-
flow improvements as the goal. And lastly, surgical leaders
should strive to create a community whereby everyone takes
care of one another, helps the colleague in need, and holds
each other accountable for wellness.


References
1. Williams TE, Satiani B, Ellison EC. The coming shortage of sur-
   geons: why they are disappearing and what that means for our
   health. Santa Barbara, CA: Praeger Publishing; 2009.
2. West CP, Dyrbye LN, Shanafelt TD. Physician burnout:
   contributors, consequences, and solutions. J Intern Med.
   2018;283(6):516–29.
3. Garcia C, de Abreu LC, Ramos JLS, de Castro CFD, Smiderle
   FRN, et al. Influence of burnout on patient safety: systematic
   review and meta-analysis. Medicina. 2019;55(9):553.
4. Salyers MP, Bonfils KA, Luther L, Firmin RL, White DA, et al.
   The relationship between professional burnout and quality
   and safety in healthcare: a meta-analysis. J Gen Intern Med.
   2017;32(4):475–82.
5. Maslach C, Schaufeli WB, Maslach C, Marek T. Professional burn-
   out: recent developments in theory and research. Washington,
   DC: Taylor & Francis; 1993.
6. Senturk JC, Melnitchouk N. Surgeon burnout: defining, identi-
   fying, and addressing the new reality. Clin Colon Rectal Surg.
   2019;32(6):407–14.
7. h tt p s : / / w w w. m e d s c a p e. c o m / s l i d e s h o w / 2 0 2 0 -­l i f e s t y l e -­
   burnout-­6012460. Accessed 17 Feb, 2020.
8. Maslach C, Jackson SE, Leiter MP. Maslach burnout inventory
   manual. 3rd ed. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press;
   1996.
754    J. R. Romanelli

 9. West CP, Dyrbye LN, Shanafelt TD. Physician burnout:
    contributors, consequences and solutions. J Intern Med.
    2018;283(6):516–29.
10. Tawfik DS, Profit J, Morganthaler TI, Satele DV, Sinsky CA,
    et al. Physician burnout, Well-being, and work unit safety grades
    in relationship to reported medical errors. May Clin Proc.
    2018;93(11):1571–80.
11. Shanafelt TD, Balch CM, Bechamps GJ, Russell T, Dyrbye L,
    et al. Burnout and career satisfaction among American surgeons.
    Ann Surg. 2009;250(3):463–71.
12. Dyrbye LN, Burke SE, Hardeman RR, Herrin J, Wittlin NM,
    et al. Association of Clinical Specialty with Symptoms of burn-
    out and career choice regret among US resident physicians.
    JAMA. 2018;320(11):1114–30.
13. Hewitt DB, Ellis RJ, Hu Y, Cheung EO, Moskovitz JT, et al.
    Evaluating the association of multiple burnout definitions
    and thresholds with prevalence and outcomes. JAMA Surg.
    2020;155(11):1043–9.
14. Engelhardt KE, Bilimoria KY, Johnson JY. A national mixed-­
    methods evaluation of preparedness for general surgery resi-
    dency and the association with resident burnout. JAMA Surg.
    2020;155(9):851–9.
15. Dean W, Talbot S, Dean A. Reframing clinical distress: moral
    injury, not burnout. Fed Pract. 2019;36(9):400–2.
16. https://www.statnews.com/2018/07/26/physicians-­not-­burning-­
    out-­they-­are-­suffering-­moral-­injury/. Accessed 10 Dec, 2020.
17. Kopacz MS, Ames D, Koenig HG. It’s time to talk about physi-
    cian burnout and moral injury. Lancet Psychiatry. 2019;6(11):e28.
18. https://zdoggmd.com/moral-­injury. Accessed 10 Dec, 2020.
19. https://www.kevinmd.com/blog/2019/11/how-­the-­administrative-­
    burden-­contributes-­to-­physician-­burnout.html. Accessed 3 Dec,
    2020.
20. Embriaco N, Azoulay E, Barrau K, et al. High level of burnout in
    intensivists: prevalence and associated factors. Am J Respir Crit
    Care Med. 2007;175:686–92.
21. Dewa CS, Jacobs P, Thanh NX, et al. An estimate of the cost
    of burnout on early retirement and reduction in clinical hours
    of practicing physicians in Canada. BMC Health Serv Res.
    2014;14:254.
22. Moss M, Good VS, Gozal D, et al. An official critical care
    societies collaborative statement: burnout syndrome in critical
    care healthcare professionals: a call for action. Crit Care Med.
    2016;44:1414–21.
   Chapter 38.     Surgeon Wellness: Scope of the Problem…              755

23. October 4, 1984 & Libby Zion: the day medicine changed forever.
    Accessed at https://conciergemedicinemd.com/october-­4-­1984-­
    libby-­zion-­the-­day-­medicine-­changed-­forever/ on November 5,
    2020.
24. Ericsson KA. Deliberate practice and the acquisition and main-
    tenance of expert performance in medicine and related domains.
    Acad Med. 2004;79(10 Suppl):S70–81.
25. Sweller J. Cognitive load theory. Psychology of learning and
    motivation. Elsevier; 2011. p. 37–76.
26. Cowan N. Metatheory of storage capacity limits. Behav Brain
    Sci. 2001;24(1):154–76.
27. Iskander M. Burnout, Cognitive Overload and Metacognition in
    Medicine. MedSciEduc. 2019;29:325–8.
28. Kirschner PA. Cognitive load theory: implications of cog-
    nitive load theory on the design of learning. Learn Instr.
    2002;12(1):1–10.
29. Scott BM, Schwartz NH. Navigational spatial displays: the role of
    metacognition as cognitive load. Learn Instr. 2007;17(1):89–105.
30. https://www.luc.edu/media/lucedu/law/centers/healthlaw/pdfs/
    advancedirective/pdfs/issue4/thomas.pdf. Accessed 3 Dec, 2020.
31. Seabury SA, Chandra A, Lakdawalla DN, Jena AB. On average,
    physicians spend nearly 11 percent of their 40-year careers with an
    open, unresolved malpractice claim. Health Aff. 2013;32(1):111–9.
32. https://www.thedoctors.com/articles/overcoming-­the-­stress-­of-­
    malpractice-­litigation-­solutions-­to-­help-­physicians-­stay-­healthy-­
    and-­engaged/. Accessed 13 Oct, 2020.
33. Kohn LT, Corrigan J, Donaldson MS. To err is human: building a
    safer health system. Washington, DC: National Academies Press
    (US); 2000.
34. https://www.norcal-­group.com/wellness/reduce-­litigation-­stress-­
    to-­help-­prevent-­physician-­burnout. Accessed 13 Oct, 2020.
35. Ryan RM, Deci EL. Self-determination theory and the facilita-
    tion of intrinsic motivation, social development, and Well-being.
    Am Psychol. 2000;55:68–78.
36. Walter GJ, Kono S. The effects of basic psychological need satis-
    faction during leisure and paid work on global life satisfaction. J
    Posit Psychol. 2018;13:36–47.
37. Babenko O. Healthcare (Basel). 2018;6(1):12.
38. https://www.kevinmd.com/blog/2019/09/to-­extinguish-­burnout-­
    bring-­back-­physician-­autonomy.html. Accessed 10 Dec, 2020.
39. Emanuel EJ, Pearson SD. Physician autonomy and health care
    reform. J Am Med Assoc. 2012;307(4):367–8.
40. Dyrbye LN, Shanafelt TD. Physician burnout: a potential threat
    to successful health care reform. JAMA. 2011;305(19):2009–10.
756    J. R. Romanelli

41. West CP, Dyrybe LN, Sinsky C, et al. Resilience and burnout
    among physicians and the general US working population.
    JAMA Netw Open. 2020;3(7):e209385.
42. Dyrybe LN, Massie FS, Eacker A, et al. Relationship between
    burnout and professional conduct and attitudes among US medi-
    cal students. JAMA. 2010;304:1173–80.
43. Nedrow A, Stecker NA, Hardman J. Physician resilience
    and burnout: can you make the switch? Fam Pract Manag.
    2013;20(1):25–30.
44. Doctors and Divorce. http://hms.harvard.edu/news/doctors-­
    divorce. Accessed on 15 Sep, 2020.
45. Gawande A. “Why doctors hate their computers”, published in
    the new Yorker. November. 2018;5
46. Collier R. Electronic health records contributing to physician
    burnout. CMAJ. 2017;189(45):E1405–6.
47. Friedberg MW, Chen PG, Van Busum KR, Aunon F, Pham C,
    et al. Factors Affecting Physician Professional Satisfaction and
    Their Implications for Patient Care, Health Systems, and Health
    Policy. Accessed at https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/
    RR439.html on September 28, 2020.
48. Melnick ER, Dyrybe LN, Sinsky CA, Trockel M, West CP, et al.
    The association between perceived electronic health record
    usability and professional burnout among US physicians. Mayo
    Clin Proc. 2020 Mar;95(3):476–87.
49. Young RA, Burge SK, Kumar KA, Wilson JM, Ortiz DF. A time-­
    motion study of primary care physicians’ work in the electronic
    health record. Fam Med. 2018;50(2):91–9.
50. Strongwater S, Lee TH. Are EMRs to blame for physician burn-
    out? NEJM Catalyst, October. 2016;24
51. https://eventpilotadmin.com/web/page.php?page=Speaker&proj
    ect=SAGES20&id=3346. Accessed 7 Dec, 2020.
52. Buckingham M. The one thing you need to know: about
    great managing, great leading, and sustained individual success.
    New York: Free Press; 2005.
53. Romanelli J, Gee D, Mellinger JD, Alseidi A, Bittner JG, et al.
    The COVID-19 reset: lesson from the pandemic on burnout and
    the practice of surgery. Surg Endosc. 2020;34(12):5201–7.
54. Perlo J, Balik B, Swensen S, Kabcenell A, Landsman J, et al. IHI
    framework for improving joy in work. Cambridge, MA: Institute
    for Healthcare Improvement; 2017.
Chapter 39
The Disruptive Surgeon
M. Shane Dawson and Rebecca B. Kowalski




“The disruptive surgeon” is a phrase we have all heard. Most
of us have experienced it firsthand: as a student, resident, or
fellow being berated by an attending; witnessing inappropri-
ate comments; observing a colleague decompensating; or any
combination of these events. Writing this chapter was actually
a struggle for the authors, as it brought up a lot of PTSD-like
memories of some of the behaviors we have personally wit-
nessed over the years. As a resident, one author watched an
attending throw an instrument at the scrub tech, which
landed on the field and shattered, spraying pieces all over the
patient which then had to be located. Both authors have wit-
nessed attendings making inappropriate comments in the
operating room, when no one felt comfortable saying some-
thing to stop the comments. During their first year as an
attending, one author had a surgeon from another surgical
subspecialty burst into the operating room while performing
an emergency case on a weekend evening because the other


M. S. Dawson · R. B. Kowalski (*)
Northwell Health at Lenox Hill Hospital, New York, NY, USA
e-mail: shane@shanedawson.com; rkowalski@northwell.edu

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature   757
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_39
758   M. S. Dawson and R. B. Kowalski

attending was angry at the circulating nurse, start yelling, and
then had to become the “disruptive surgeon” who yelled at
the other attending to leave the operating room so the team
could focus on the emergency case.
   It is key to point out that disruptive behavior is not limited
to physicians or surgeons. Nurses, scrub techs, patients, and
family members are often guilty of disruptive behavior as
well, all of which can have an equally negative impact on
patient safety and quality of care. However, this chapter will
focus on the disruptive surgeon.
   Some of us may have been labeled as “a disruptive sur-
geon” ourselves. Whether it is unacceptable behavior such as
anger or throwing instruments, inappropriate or derogatory
language, or otherwise creating an environment that is not
conducive to other members of the team speaking up, the
disruptive surgeon is a definite threat to quality, outcomes,
and safety in the operating room and beyond.


What Is Disruptive Behavior?
Disruptive behavior can be categorized into aggressive, pas-
sive, or passive-aggressive behaviors [1]. While the aggressive
behaviors are “more disruptive” in the sense that they are
usually more easily recognized, the passive or passive-­
aggressive behaviors can be harmful over the course of time
as they will “build up” more to the point of breaking.
   The behavior can be overt, as with the use of profane, dis-
respectful, insulting, demeaning, insensitive, or abusive lan-
guage; negative comments about colleagues (either spoken or
in the patient’s chart); verbal intimidation; inappropriate
arguments with patients, family members, or colleagues; rude-
ness; boundary violations; outbursts of anger; bullying behav-
ior; throwing or breaking things; or the use of or the threat of
unwarranted physical force with patients, family members, or
colleagues [2].
   Disruptive behavior can also be covert or passive, such as
refusal to comply with known and generally accepted prac-
tice standards; repeated failure to respond or late response
                    Chapter 39.   The Disruptive Surgeon    759

to calls or requests for information or assistance when
expected to be available; not working collaboratively with
others; and creating rigid or inflexible barriers to requests
for assistance [2].
   There are some key terms that will be used through the
remainder of this chapter that need to be clearly defined.
These terms include:
1. Professional competence: “The habitual and judicious use
   of communication, knowledge, technical skills, clinical rea-
   soning, emotions, values and reflection in daily practice for
   the benefit of the individual and community being served”
   [3]. The Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical
   Education (ACGME) and the American Board of Medical
   Specialties (ABMS) have divided competence into “com-
   petencies” in specific domains, including those that apply
   to all physicians and those that are unique to each specialty
   [3]. A deficiency in any of these domains can be referred to
   as a “dyscompetency,” which can be a helpful term because
   no one is totally incompetent [3].
2. Mental and behavioral problems: Include depression, anxi-
   ety, substance abuse, personality disorders, and disruptive
   behavior with colleagues, patients, and subordinates [3].
3. Disruptive physician: A physician who exhibits abusive
   behavior that “interferes with patient care or could rea-
   sonably be expected to interfere with the process of deliv-
   ering quality care” [3]. Examples include profane or
   disrespectful language, demeaning behavior, sexual com-
   ments or innuendo, outbursts of anger, throwing instru-
   ments or charts, criticizing hospital staff in front of
   patients or other staff, negative comments about another
   physician’s care, boundary violations with staff or patients,
   inappropriate chart notes (e.g., criticizing the treatment
   provided by other caregivers), or unethical or dishonest
   behavior [3].
4. Impaired physician: Defined by the American Medical
   Association as a disability resulting from psychiatric ill-
   ness, alcoholism, or drug dependence.
5. Performance problems: All types of deficiencies, regardless
   of cause [3].
760   M. S. Dawson and R. B. Kowalski

   Although surgeons have been the specialty most com-
monly identified as “disruptive physicians” [4], a disruptive
physician in any field is an obvious source of concern in the
patient care environment. The fact that surgeons have been
most commonly identified as disruptive may be related to the
higher stress environment of the operating room or the per-
ceived high-stakes nature of surgical care.
   Disruptive behavior in the healthcare environment is not
new, but in the past, the disruptive behavior has been ignored,
tolerated, reinforced, or not reported [5]. We have all heard
some version of the phrase “the squeaky wheel gets the oil,”
which is one way the behavior has been reinforced: surgeons
who make a scene when they do not get what they want get
things their way because the staff does not want to deal with
the fallout if they don’t get what they want, which reinforces
the disruptive behavior. Conversely, surgeons who do not
exhibit the disruptive behavior often get negative reinforce-
ment of their good behavior because the staff knows they will
not “erupt” and therefore will choose to give the disruptive
surgeon what they want over the nondisruptive surgeon.
Over time, this can lead to the nondisruptive surgeon becom-
ing disruptive, and lead to a general decline in operating
room staff morale.
   In 2018 when the American College of Surgeons (ACS)
conducted their annual survey, one of the topics addressed
was the disruptive or impaired surgeon, and the Board of
Governors then published feedback related to the disruptive
or impaired surgeon. “Disruptive behavior by a physician,
often called abusive behavior, generally refers to a style of
interaction by physicians with others - including hospital per-
sonnel, patients, and family members - that interferes with
patient care or adversely affects the health care team’s ability
to work effectively. It encompasses behavior that adversely
affects morale, focus and concentration, collaboration, and
communication and information transfer - all of which can
lead to substandard patient care” [6].
                    Chapter 39.   The Disruptive Surgeon    761

 hat Are the Underlying Causes
W
of Disruptive Behavior?
Disruptive behavior is driven by multiple factors. Staffing
shortages, stress of the clinical environment, production pres-
sures, financial constraints, increased governmental oversight
with increasing managed care regulations, and greater liabil-
ity risks have all been cited as factors that can increase pres-
sure and may contribute to disruptive behavior.
   Thinking of performance problems as symptoms of under-
lying disorders (rather than a disease in and of itself) can be
helpful in understanding the underlying causes of perfor-
mance problems and disruptive behavior. These can include
mental and behavioral problems, including substance abuse
or dependence (drugs or alcohol); physical illness, including
age-related and disease-related cognitive impairment; a
decline in surgeon wellness; and failure to maintain or
acquire knowledge and skills [3].
   Contributing to or compounding these underlying prob-
lems are fatigue, stress, isolation, and easy access to drugs
[3]. The “normal stress” of medical practice has been exac-
erbated by increasing educational debt loads for graduating
physicians, increasing malpractice premiums, decreasing
reimbursement, and increasing pressure to see more
patients in a shorter amount of time [3]. Stress can lead to
isolation and maladaptive coping strategies such as alcohol
or drug abuse [3]. By the time these issues appear in the
workplace, the physician’s relationships with significant
others, family, friends, and community have typically been
“impaired” for a long time [3]. A decline in wellness, with
“burnout” being the end stage of the spectrum, is another
underlying cause of performance problems, and subsequent
disruptive behavior. This is discussed further in Chap. 38,
Surgeon Wellness.
762   M. S. Dawson and R. B. Kowalski

What Is the Extent of the Problem?
According to data provided by the Federation of State
Medical Boards of the United States, 4081 physicians were
disciplined by state medical boards in 2017 [7]. This number
has remained relatively stable over the past decade. These
figures are difficult to interpret within the realm of the dis-
ruptive physician, as there are a variety of reasons physicians
may be disciplined by a state medical board.
    With regard to mental illness, there were an estimated 17.3
million adults (aged 18 or older) in 2017 diagnosed with a
major depressive episode, which represents 7.1% of all adults
in the United States [8]. The prevalence may be higher in
physicians, as rates of suicide are noted to be higher in physi-
cians than in the general population: male physicians have
suicide rates as much as 40% higher than the general popula-
tion, and female doctors up to 130% higher than the general
population [9]. Substance abuse or dependence rates may
also be higher in physicians than in the general public, with
female physicians in particular having a higher rate of alco-
holism than women in the general population [10].
    Despite a lack of data, it is estimated that 3–5% of physi-
cians exhibit disruptive behavior [2, 3], although the negative
effects are disproportionately felt [2].
    Physical illness specifically in physicians has not been stud-
ied, but an estimated 10% of physicians must restrict their
practice for several months or more during their career
because of a disabling physical illness [3]. Although physi-
cians are subject to age-related cognitive decline just like
nonphysicians, cognitive decline in physicians has not been
quantified [3].
    Knowledge and skill dyscompetencies are also difficult to
estimate as there is limited data such as failure rates on recer-
tification examinations. An estimated 10% of physicians will
demonstrate significant deficiencies in knowledge or skills at
some point in their career [3].
    When all these conditions are taken into account, at least
one-third of physicians will experience a period during which
                     Chapter 39.   The Disruptive Surgeon    763

they have a condition that impairs their ability to practice
medicine safely at some point in their career [3]. This trans-
lates into an average of 1–2 physicians per year in a hospital
with a staff of 100 physicians. Referral rates to state physician
health programs suggest that few practitioners get help, and
even serious problems are often poorly handled at the hospi-
tal or practice level [3].
    The impaired physician is in some ways easier to recognize
and address, because there are defined metrics and pathways:
substance tests, blood alcohol levels, and psychiatric evalua-
tions. Most states have defined pathways for treatment for
these issues, and there are delineated measurements and
protocols for returning the impaired surgeon to clinical work.
    The disruptive physician is more challenging in many ways.
While recognizing the disruptive behavior may be easier,
there are not standard pathways to manage the disruptive
behavior or return the disruptive physician to clinical work.
In addition, some surgeons have been labeled as “disruptive”
for disagreeing with policies or changes. While many physi-
cians labeled as disruptive have truly needed help, the ACS
Board of Governors survey also revealed that more than one-­
third of Governors were aware of physicians being labeled as
disruptive when they disagreed with policies at a hospital or
system and/or disagreed with proposed changes [6]. Medical
staff policies, procedures, and bylaws must be in place to pro-
tect due process. For those surgeons who exhibit disruptive
behavior, we as colleagues need to provide them with assis-
tance and training to address the disruptive behavior.
    The best treatment for disruptive behavior is to prevent its
development. Prevention can occur through a number of
strategies, such as participation in an ongoing wellness
­program, improving surgeons’ emotional intelligence, inter-
 vention from a colleague, or stress reduction activities.
 Establishing transparent rules for behavior, as well as the
 ramifications if the rules are breached, is a helpful adjunct.
 These actions can help improve morale and stave off conflict
 resulting from disruptive behavior [6].
764   M. S. Dawson and R. B. Kowalski

   Sadly, it is the case that physicians who generate high
revenues for hospitals receive more favorable treatment
when they are disruptive. Physician disruptive behavior is
frequently ignored or tolerated, in part because those
responsible for addressing the behavior find it to be a diffi-
cult and unpleasant task and because even when they
undertake to do so, organizational mechanisms often prove
inadequate to solve the problem [3]. Indeed, disruptive phy-
sicians are frequently “indulged,” as healthcare managers
give in to their demands simply to stop the disruptive
behavior. This, in effect, rewards the disruptive behavior and
has led to “normalization of deviance,” with disruptive
behavior becoming an accepted way of doing business for
some physicians, and even for nonphysicians who imitate
the behavior [11].


 ow Does Disruptive Behavior Impact
H
Patient Safety?
The Joint Commission has reported in its root cause analysis
of sentinel events that nearly 70% of the events can be traced
back to a problem with communication [4]. Communication
failures are the leading causes of inadvertent patient harm
[12]. The Joint Commission also stated that “intimidating and
disruptive behaviors” can result in medical errors that affect
patient care and safety, which include “overt actions such as
verbal outburst and physical threats, as well as passive activi-
ties such as refusing to perform assigned tasks or quietly
exhibiting uncooperative attitudes,” “reluctance or refusal to
answer questions, return phone calls or pages, condescending
language or voice intonation, and impatience with questions”
[1]. All of these overt and passive actions can easily lead to a
breakdown in communication, which can negatively impact
patient safety.
   Disruptive behavior can cause significant psychologic and
behavioral disturbances that can have a critical effect on
                    Chapter 39.   The Disruptive Surgeon    765

focus, concentration, collaboration, communication, and
information transfer, which can lead to potentially prevent-
able adverse events, errors, compromises in safety and quality,
and patient mortality [4]. These adverse events or patient
mortality can lead to a decline in physician wellness, which
can worsen the cycle of disruptive behavior.
    There are multiple ways that disruptive behavior impacts
patient safety. Disruptive behaviors can directly affect patient
satisfaction, hospital reputation, and, in some cases, quality
ratings [5], which can all financially impact a hospital and
indirectly impact patient safety. Disruptive behavior can also
lead to a decrease in job satisfaction with staff, leading to a
higher rate of turnover, which can adversely impact the func-
tioning of the team in the operating room.
    Disruptive behavior undermines teamwork and collegial-
ity, which can lead to medical errors. Staff experience ten-
sion around a disruptive clinician will hesitate to ask for
help or clarification when unsure about orders or withhold
useful suggestions for patient care due to fear of criticism or
intimidation [2]. The creation of a tense or “hostile” envi-
ronment due to fear of criticism can prevent someone point-
ing out a potential issue before it occurs. Instead of the “if
you see something, say something” attitude that should be
encouraged, a student, resident, or staff member might rec-
ognize a potential problem but not mention it so as to avoid
causing an outburst from the surgeon. One author witnessed
this firsthand as a third year medical student: a sponge was
left inside a patient during a Cesarean section, because the
attending surgeon at one point unclamped the clamp hold-
ing the sponge; during the count, the surgeon insisted a
sponge could not be left inside the patient and closed the
abdomen despite the sponge count being incorrect. The
patient ultimately stayed in the operating room while get-
ting an X-ray and was then opened again to retrieve the
sponge that was retained. Hierarchy frequently inhibits
people from speaking up [12]. While surgery has a natural
hierarchy that is unavoidable to some extent, as the surgeon
766   M. S. Dawson and R. B. Kowalski

must be the “captain of the ship,” effective leaders flatten
the hierarchy, which encourages team members to speak up
and participate. Authoritarian leaders create unnecessary
risk by reinforcing the hierarchy and creating an environ-
ment that does not feel “safe” to speak up [12]. These les-
sons have been introduced into the operative room
environment by crew resource management techniques that
were initially introduced in the United States Military.
   When patients or families witness disruptive behavior, it
undermines their confidence in the physician and the institu-
tion, as well as their willingness to participate in their own
care [3]. They may not ask questions or admit they do not
understand, so as to avoid having the disruptive behavior
targeted toward themselves.
   Outbursts or disruptive behavior from the surgeon causes
a shift in the focus of those in the room from the care of the
patient to managing the surgeon’s behavior [13]. Rather than
paying attention to the procedure or the patient or the safety
of the patient, as well as the safety of the team, the members
of the team become focused on de-escalating or pacifying the
surgeon to try to prevent further outbursts [13]. There can
also be a “snowball effect” of increasingly frequent errors,
which may be due to impaired decision-making by team
members, decreased efficacy of communication, or height-
ened anxiety in team members [3, 13].
   The inherently stressful environment of the operating
room becomes exponentially more stressful if the staff is wor-
rying about the surgeon demonstrating disruptive behavior
[13]. In addition, because of this, communication suffers as a
result of members of the team being unwilling to speak up if
they notice a problem. Repeated exposure to disruptive
behavior can also lead to increased staff turnover due to the
corrosive effect on morale [3], which can decrease the efficacy
of the surgical team as a whole. These effects on quality,
safety, and staff wellness can lead to large economic losses for
healthcare institutions [5].
                     Chapter 39.   The Disruptive Surgeon     767

How Do we Identify the Disruptive Surgeon?
There are several issues surrounding the timely reporting of
and intervention for disruptive behavior. One is that since the
disruptive behavior is often exhibited by healthcare profes-
sionals in positions of power, healthcare workers are often
concerned about retaliation [2]. There is also a pervasive
culture of “medical omertà” (a code of silence) that makes
healthcare workers reluctant to report performance prob-
lems in their colleagues [2].
   The Joint Commission requires that hospitals have a code
of conduct defining acceptable behavior and behavior that
undermines a culture of safety, documenting behavioral stan-
dards and the repercussions of failure to comply, and estab-
lishing a process for managing disruptive behavior, but the
extent to which these policies are enforced, compliance is
tracked, or disruptive behavior is addressed is unknown [2].
Although hospitals are required to have credentialing and
disciplinary processes, the details of implementing these pro-
cesses are left up to the institutions [3]. There are few national
or state standards of conduct or competence, or measures for
monitoring performance [3]. This leads to widely varying
institutional responses to disruptive behavior.
   Hospitals, physician practices, and other healthcare institu-
tions should not only have written standards and policies that
set expectations for physician professional behavior but
should also address unprofessional behavior in a strict but
fair way, using an approach that escalates from coaching and
counseling to punitive measures if the disruptive behavior
persists after early interventions [2]. A recent study by
Swiggart et al. indicates that many physicians who exhibit
persistent patterns of disruptive behavior and undergo inten-
sive programs can demonstrate improved behavior [1, 2].
   Healthcare leaders and institutions must set expectations
for professional behavior, enforce policies, and invest
resources in programs to help distressed physicians [2]. The
goal should always be remediation first, with appropriate
escalation in severity as needed. Ideally, the goal would be to
768   M. S. Dawson and R. B. Kowalski

identify “at-risk” doctors before they become “problem” doc-
tors and certainly before patient safety is affected. We need
better metrics for identifying physicians who need help, and
better programs for providing help to the physicians who
need it [3]. The three essential characteristics of a system to
identify these physicians are:
1. An objective system with a basis in data, as much of the
   criticism of the current methods is that they are based on
   subjective judgments of personality, motivation, or charac-
   ter instead of performance [3].
2. A fair system, where all physicians are evaluated on an
   annual basis according to the same measures in an open,
   unbiased, and labor-regulation-compliant manner [3].
3. A responsive system, with prompt intervention when a
   problem physician is identified [3].
   The first step of developing this system is the creation of
explicit performance standards of behavior and competence,
which need to be developed at a national level and should
address all aspects of professional behavior [3]. This would
also remove the variability between institutions and would
set professional standards across all levels.
   The second step is that all physicians be required to
acknowledge that they have read and understand the stan-
dards, have a responsibility to follow the standards, are aware
that adherence will be monitored, and understand that persis-
tent failure will lead to loss of privileges and dismissal [3].
This acknowledgment should be given in writing or as a part
of annual web-based training as a condition of being granted
clinical privileges [3]. This step would ensure that the policies
are transparent to all involved.
   The third step is monitoring for adherence to the explicitly
stated standards by formal annual evaluations of all members
of the staff using accepted and validated measures of compe-
tence and behavior, including confidential evaluations by
colleagues and coworkers with analysis of complaints by
patients or others [3]. It is important to have evaluations by
colleagues and coworkers and not only supervisors as these
                      Chapter 39.   The Disruptive Surgeon      769

disruptive behaviors are masked from supervisors until the
physician is “past the point of no return.” In order to identify
“at-risk” physicians, early identification is crucial.
   The fourth step is communication of the (de-identified)
results to the individual. Identified deficiencies should prompt
a response from the department chair, which could include
evaluative testing, counseling, or referral for further assess-
ment and treatment, or immediate action to limit practice
during assessment and rehabilitation in the setting of cases
that threaten patient welfare [3]. The de-identified results of
evaluations are to protect the evaluators, but the communica-
tion of the results is critical for transparency. If the results are
not shared with the physician, he or she will not be able to
address the problems that are identified.
   A system with these clearly delineated steps would serve
several purposes: every person would understand their roles
and responsibilities when a practitioner with performance
issues has been identified, and there would be accountability
on all levels, from the physician to the chair of the depart-
ment to the hospital administration to the state boards [3].
Again, this would remove some of the variability from institu-
tion to institution. Once this standard system is in place, the
next step is to develop a defined remediation pathway with
clear metrics for evaluating the success of the remediation.


 ow Do we Remediate the Disruptive
H
Surgeon?
A key aspect of managing the disruptive surgeon is the ques-
tion of whether surgeons who exhibit disruptive behavior can
be “trained” – can they be taught to behave more appropri-
ately under stressful conditions, or do they need to be
removed from the profession [13]? Remediation can include
providing education and training to improve communication
skills and professional interactions of physicians and medical
students [1].
770   M. S. Dawson and R. B. Kowalski

   A program targeting the root causes of physician misbe-
havior (such as burnout, poor stress management, poor self-­
care, and inability to manage the demands of work and
personal life) can help coach physicians to improve their
behavior [1, 2]. As with any problem, getting to the root cause
is one of the most important aspects of managing the issue.
Programs like this can succeed when there is institutional
commitment to physician professionalism and wellness, there
are structured curricula, and there are quantitative metrics to
assess improvement in behavior [1, 2].
   One of the obstacles to developing strong remediation
programs is a lack of expertise to oversee the programs. Few
national programs exist, and hospital-level programs are
often poorly organized [3]. In order to appropriately address
this widespread issue, we should focus on developing a
national quality program that will allow remediation. This
would also address the issue of each individual hospital not
having appropriately trained staff to help with remediation.
   Another barrier is that often hospitals and physicians are
reluctant to voluntarily guide, mentor, and supervise remedi-
ation activities, as department chairs and other leaders often
lack the formal supervisory training or experience needed to
effectively manage physicians with performance problems of
any type [3]. Remediation will be ineffective if the program is
not adequate, so the development of a national, standardized
program is crucial. Following the COVID-19 pandemic, most
meetings have been forced to be hosted virtually, and there-
fore it is possible that these remediation programs could be
conducted virtually.
   A separate but related barrier is the financial aspect: phy-
sicians may be unwilling to participate in the remediation
programs due to financial burden, as they are already going
to lose practice income during the programs and then are also
responsible for paying for the cost of the program [3]. To
ensure these programs are the most effective, the direct and
indirect costs to the physician attending the program would
need to be minimal, or covered in some other fashion.
                     Chapter 39.   The Disruptive Surgeon     771

Reimbursement for time spent at the remediation program
would be challenging, but one option would be to schedule
the program for alternative times or days that would not
require the physician to lose income as a result of attending
the program. One potential solution would be to offer some
sort of incentive to all physicians who elected to preemptively
attend these programs, similar to a new driver getting a lower
insurance rate if they attended driver’s education.
   Documentation of evaluations, events, and interventions is
an essential component of the remediation process. Clear
communication also is critical in the prevention and manage-
ment of disruptive behavior. As cases are reported, investi-
gated, and adjudicated, differences of opinion can be part of
the problem, and many stem from miscommunication. With
prevention in mind, surgeons should be taught effective lis-
tening skills and work to improve their emotional intelligence
to avoid conflict and escalating confrontations. Surgeons are
natural problem solvers; given the appropriate tools and
resources, they can handily deal with this challenge to
improve their working environments [6]. Again, the focus on
the “disruptive surgeon” should be at prevention rather than
waiting to address the problem. As with many other wellness-­
related issues, we need to start these preventative measures
earlier – most likely these measures should be started during
medical school, but certainly during residency, if the ultimate
goal is to prevent the behavior. Again, national standards
would facilitate adopting the preventative measures.


Summary
Healthcare leaders and institutions must set expectations for
professional behavior, enforce policies, and invest resources
in programs to help distressed and disruptive physicians. The
ideal solution would aim to prevent the disruptive behavior
before it starts and focus on early identification and remedia-
tion. It is crucial to point out that while much of the literature
772    M. S. Dawson and R. B. Kowalski

focuses on the disruptive physician, disruptive behavior is not
limited to physicians or surgeons. Disruptive behavior in
other members of the healthcare team can equally impact
patient safety and outcomes.


References
 1. Swiggart WH, Bills JL, Penberthy JK, Dewey CM, Worley
    LLM. A professional development course improves unpro-
    fessional physician behavior. Jt Comm J Qual Patient Saf.
    2020;46(2):64–71.
 2. Gautham KS. Addressing disruptive and unprofessional physi-
    cian behavior. Jt Comm J Qual Patient Saf. 2020;46(2):61–3.
 3. Leape LL, Fromson JA. Problem doctors: is there a system-level
    solution? Ann Intern Med. 2006;144(2):107–15.
 4. Rosenstein AH, O’Daniel M. A survey of the impact of disrup-
    tive behaviors and communication defects on patient safety. Jt
    Comm J Qual Patient Saf. 2008;34(8):464–71.
 5. Rosenstein AH. The quality and economic impact of disruptive
    behaviors on clinical outcomes of patient care. Am J Med Qual.
    2011;26(5):372–9.
 6. Paramo JC, Welsh DJ, Kirby J, et al. ACS governors survey: the
    disruptive and impaired surgeon. 2018;2019.
 7. Federation of State Medical Boards of the United States.
    U.S. Medical Regulatory Trends and Actions. 2018. Available
    at: https://www.fsmb.org/siteassets/advocacy/publications/us-­
    medical-­regulatory-­trends-­actions.pdf. Accessed Sep 24, 2020.
 8. National Institute of Mental Health. Available at: https://www.
    nimh.nih.gov/health/statistics/mental-­illness.shtml. Accessed Sep
    24, 2020.
 9. Kalmoe MC, Chapman MB, Gold JA, Giedinghagen
    AM. Physician suicide: a call to action. Mo Med.
    2019;116(3):211–6.
10. Schernhammer E. Taking their own lives -- the high rate of phy-
    sician suicide. N Engl J Med. 2005;352(24):2473–6.
11. Porto G, Lauve R. Disruptive clinician behavior: a persistent
    threat to patient safety. Patient Saf Qual Healthc. Available at:
    https://www.psqh.com/julaug06/disruptive.html. Accessed Sep
    23, 2020.
                     Chapter 39.   The Disruptive Surgeon      773

12. Leonard M, Graham S, Bonacum D. The human factor: The
    critical importance of effective teamwork and communication
    in providing safe care. Qual Saf health care. 2004 Oct;13 Suppl
    1(Suppl 1):i85–i90.
13. Cochran A, Elder WB. Effects of disruptive surgeon behavior in
    the operating room. Am J Surg. 2015;209(1):65–70.
Chapter 40
The Surgeon as Collateral
Damage: The Second
Victim Phenomenon
Rebecca Gates and Charles Paget


Introduction
   Virtually every practitioner knows the sickening realization of
   making a bad mistake. You feel singled out and exposed—seized
   by the instinct to see if anyone has noticed. You agonize about
   what to do, whether to tell anyone, what to say. Later, the event
   replays itself over and over in your mind. You question your com-
   petence but fear being discovered. You know you should confess,
   but dread the prospect of potential punishment and of the
   patient's anger. You may become overly attentive to the patient
   or family, lamenting the failure to do so earlier and, if you haven't
   told them, wondering if they know [1].

   In 2000, Dr. Albert Wu, an internist at Johns Hopkins
University, published an editorial calling for attention to the
emotional needs of healthcare providers after a medical error
or mistake. The terminology was “second victim syndrome” –
the concept that medical error creates psychological distress
in physicians, with unnecessary and unintended consequences
[1]. This was the start of a culture change within the healthcare


R. Gates · C. Paget (*)
Virginia Tech Carilion School of Medicine and Carilion Clinic,
Roanoke, VA, USA
e-mail: rsgates@carilionclinic.org; cjpaget@carilionclinic.org

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature            775
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_40
776   R. Gates and C. Paget

field, with an impetus on caring for the caregiver. Surgeons,
given the direct nature of our involvement, are particularly
vulnerable.
   Three quarters of all physicians and 83–91% of all sur-
geons will experience this phenomenon on at least one occa-
sion throughout their career with more than 30% of surgeons
experiencing an intraoperative adverse event within the past
year [2]. It is postulated that 30% of all healthcare providers
experience personal consequences (physical or psychologi-
cal) related to an adverse event every year [3].


The Second Victim Phenomenon
To err is to be human, yet surgeons are inherently perfection-
ists and tend as a group to not look for excuses and to not
consider ourselves as “victims.” We want our operations to go
smoothly, to fix discrete problems, and to have our patients
recover well and leave the hospital better than the state in
which they came. This doesn’t always happen and our reac-
tion to this determines the collateral damage. Medical error is
the third leading cause of death in America [4]. Major com-
plications or adverse events occur in up to 16% of all inpa-
tient surgical procedures and can lead to permanent morbidity
or mortality in almost 1% of cases [5]. Given the unique
personal relationship between surgeons and their patients,
complications or medical errors are often perceived as per-
sonal failures and can cause a cataclysm of negative emotions,
which can result in anxiety, loss of confidence, insomnia,
reduced job satisfaction, grief, shame, embarrassment, anger,
sadness, indecision, and decreased efficacy [2, 6–11]. Over a
career, these repetitive traumas may compound, leading to
posttraumatic stress disorder, burnout, depression, suicidality,
or career change, among others [6, 12, 13].
    As described by Scott et al., the second victim experience is
characterized by distinct stages. First, there is a period of
“chaos and accident response” which generally occurs in the
immediate period around the complication or event. This stage
        Chapter 40. The Surgeon as Collateral Damage…           777

is characterized by confusion and/or decreased efficacy [7]. The
second stage is one of “intrusive reflections,” where the sur-
geon dwells on the event and it dominates the mindspace. This
can lead to anger, frustration, distraction, and lack of confi-
dence. Isolation may also be a part of this stage, especially if the
adverse event has come to the attention of other surgeons,
which may trigger the isolation as a result of guilt or shame.
The third stage is “restoring personal integrity,” where the sur-
geon begins to reintegrate into their normal daily activities [7].
In practice this frequently occurs, at least in part, over the ensu-
ing hours when the surgeon must focus on the next case. The
fourth stage is “enduring the inquisition,” which can take mul-
tiple forms, from root cause analysis, peer review, or morbidity
and mortality conference to legal action or disciplinary actions.
The fifth stage is characterized by “emotional first aid,” where
the surgeon seeks peer support, family support, or perhaps
even visits with their institution’s Employee Assistance
Program or a licensed counselor. Finally, the last stage is “mov-
ing on” [7]. As with former stages, this can look vastly different
for different surgeons in different scenarios, from emotional
healing and resumption of former duties to restricting clinical
practice or even retiring. Similar to other models of grief, indi-
viduals do not always move through these stages linearly and
may have difficulty achieving resolution of these feelings and
“moving on” (Fig. 40.1).



       Chaos and                                  Restoring
                              Intrusive
         accident                                 personal
                             reflections
        response                                   integrity




      Enduring the         Emotional first
                                                  Moving on
       inquisition              aid



Figure 40.1 Six stages of second victim syndrome. (Adapted from
Scott et al. 2009)
778   R. Gates and C. Paget

 isk Factors for Experiencing Second Victim
R
Phenomenon
Empathy Overload

Empathy is treasured as a positive trait in physicians, and
generally leads to fulfilling physician-patient relationships.
It is natural to feel guilt after an adverse event given our
common humanity and the relationships we have with our
patients. Unfortunately, this “empathy-based guilt” can
quickly transition to “pathogenic guilt,” where the surgeon
may misinterpret the event and inappropriately assign
responsibility for the event, creating more guilt, shame, and
feelings of failure [14]. This type of “pathogenic guilt” is
found commonly in individuals suffering from psychiatric
conditions such as posttraumatic stress disorder [14].


Perfectionism

Many surgeons identify as perfectionists. This trait drives
the surgeon to succeed and to accomplish technical excel-
lence. Many have heard the expression, “don’t let perfect
be the enemy of good” though heeding this advice is not
straightforward. The very same attribute that drives many
surgeons to success can also be at the heart of emotional
distress after a clinical mistake or adverse event. The emo-
tional impact of a mistake may be greater in physicians
who demonstrate more perfectionistic traits, with lower
confidence, more indecision, and higher levels of depres-
sion and thoughts of career change [8–10]. This maladap-
tive perfectionism may also increase the risk of suicide in
response to the emotional turmoil associated with the
second victim syndrome [9]. It is especially important to
offer support to surgeons with perfectionistic traits after
an adverse event.
        Chapter 40. The Surgeon as Collateral Damage…          779

Training

Second victim syndrome is not solely a problem of the indepen-
dently practicing surgeon. In a 2017 article in the New York
Times, Dr. Chen noted “you can’t go through [residency] training
without making an error unless you are not taking care of
patients” [15]. Residents struggling for the first time with the
emotions related to medical error may not have a strong frame-
work for how to cope with these feelings, leading to develop-
ment of second victim syndrome. Over time, this may lead to
development of burnout or PTSD. In fact, in a national study,
22% of surgical residents screened positive for posttraumatic
stress disorder, and an additional 52% were deemed “at-risk”
based on their responses to survey questions [13]. In some pro-
grams, residents may be ashamed to admit their mistakes due to
fear of judgment from other residents, fellows, or attendings. This
is problematic, as [one of the most helpful strategies for resi-
dents struggling with the emotional consequences of a medical
error is to discuss the errors with a peer or co-resident [16].


Female Gender
Some literature suggests that female surgeons may also be
particularly vulnerable to the second victim experience [3,
17]. 49% of female physicians reported involvement in a
medical mistake at some point in their medical career.
Following this adverse event, 82% experienced guilt, 64%
experienced loss of confidence, 53% experienced shame,
49% experienced sadness, and 1% reduced their clinical vol-
ume or left clinical practice [17].


Call to Action
Individuals experiencing the second victim phenomenon
manifest many of the same outcomes as those with physician
burnout, including substance abuse, depression, absenteeism,
780   R. Gates and C. Paget

suicidality, and increased rates of medical error [18]. The
vicious cycle of medical error begetting more medical error
can be devastating to a physician’s career and psyche.
   On average, 39% of practicing physicians will experience
depression, and 400 physicians will die by suicide yearly
(National Academy of Medicine). Not only do these events have
implications for the physicians’ family, friends, and colleagues
but also for the health system. Replacing a single physician lost
to early retirement, a transition away from clinical practice, or
suicide costs the healthcare system somewhere between
$250,000 and 1,000,000 (National Academy of Medicine).
   By creating a “just” culture and a safe space for surgeons to
heal from the emotional consequences of medical error, future
adverse events are decreased, and there is less physician turn-
over, which ultimately results in improved personal and finan-
cial gains for the surgeon and the healthcare system [2].


 ecommendations for Practice at
R
an Institutional or Department Level
Although a high proportion of surgeons will experience some
degree of the second victim phenomenon, 90% of physicians
report that they are not adequately supported in processing
the emotional implications of an adverse event [6]. Creating
a safe space for second victims to heal requires a multifaceted
approach, including offering support/counseling, creating a
space to analyze the mistake and learn from it, discussing
mistakes with appropriate disclosure and apologies and sys-
tem changes, focusing on wellness, and changing the overall
culture at an institutional level [19].


 tep 1: Create a Just Culture in your Department,
S
Hospital, or Organization
Just culture is largely credited to an attorney by the name of
David Marx, who described a system in which the response to
workplace errors would depend on the behavior that led to
        Chapter 40. The Surgeon as Collateral Damage…      781

the error [20]. He described three behaviors – human error,
at-risk behavior, and reckless behavior – and recommended
that the reaction to these behaviors should resemble consol-
ing, coaching, and punishing/sanctioning, respectively [20].
Most errors that surgeons make are not related to at risk or
reckless behavior. As such, they should be handled with a
supportive environment rather than a punitive one. This is
not the culture that many surgeons were trained in, but when
adopted creates an environment that decreases the repercus-
sions for individuals who report an adverse event related to
human error. In sequence, workers are more likely to report
errors [20] (Fig. 40.2).
   In essence, creating a just culture leads to increased event
reporting, which allows a healthcare system to address
adverse events and near misses without penalizing an indi-
vidual for being human and making a mistake. Having a just
culture in which surgeons feel comfortable speaking up or
sharing their negative experiences is essential to supporting




        Human error                            Counsel




           At-risk
                                                Coach
          behavior




         Reckless
                                               Sanction
         behavior




Figure 40.2 Just culture. (Adapted from Marx [20])
782   R. Gates and C. Paget

providers who have been personally affected by an adverse
event.
   In solidarity with a just culture, some institutions including
the authors’ institution have adopted a proactive response to
both medical errors and the resulting risk to the healthcare
profession. The TRUST team program began 6 years ago at
Carilion Clinic to both proactively identify and give support
to second victims, with a goal of providing just treatment and
granting the individual in question with respect, understand-
ing and compassion, supportive care, and transparency
required to mitigate the damage [21]. As with just culture, this
approach encourages disclosure of errors with a focus on
learning from them and improving rather than placing blame
on the physician and pursuing punitive action.
                  Food for Thought How does your institution
                  and your department handle near misses? If
                  a surgeon overlooks significant hyperkalemia
                  on morning labs and 12 hours go by before
the nurse notifies him/her that the patient has EKG changes,
what happens? If the surgeon’s colleagues or the chair of the
department find out about the incident, do they think “I
cannot believe that Dr. X missed that?!”, or do they think
“thank goodness for the bedside nurse?” Are the near misses
framed as near misses, or as “great catches”? Is there a way to
reframe these events in a positive way? Can you help to create
a culture that accepts human error, counsels the provider
responsible for the error, and celebrates the individual who
identified and corrected the mistake?



 tep 2: Create a Network of Support and Aggregate
S
Additional Resources
When creating a program to support colleagues struggling
with an adverse event, it is important to consider the overall
structure of the program first. It is important to establish
whether the program will be primarily one of peer support or
        Chapter 40. The Surgeon as Collateral Damage…        783

one of counselor/non-peer support. Each of these can be suc-
cessful alone or can be combined for greater access. It is well-­
described in the literature that Employee Assistance Programs
are historically underutilized by physicians, who primarily use
peers as resources during stressful circumstances [22].
However, it should be noted that male and female surgeons
differ in their assistance-seeking behaviors, with males gener-
ally seeking assistance from colleagues or friends and females
more likely to seek assistance in the form of a professional
counselor [23]. When creating a program, it is paramount to
consider which type of program may be most successful in
your institution or department. A short survey may be benefi-
cial in determining which resources (peer or non-peer) would
be most utilized by surgeons in your group.
    Successful peer support programs have been described at
multiple institutions [24–26] and may be easier to institute at
a departmental level as they require fewer resources. Peer
support programs mainly rely on self-identification or peer
identification, which requires significant buy-in from
­providers. A well-functioning peer support program requires
 recruitment of a large number of peer coaches who represent
 the institution in terms of demographic characteristics such as
 specialty, age, gender, race, and years in practice. Oftentimes,
 these initial peer coaches are identified by surveying physi-
 cians in a department to determine which of their peers they
 would feel most comfortable talking to about an adverse
 event. It should be emphasized that the support should be
 about the emotional response. Often the tendency of two
 surgeons discussing a complication is to dissect out the tech-
 nical and clinical issues. These details should specifically be
 avoided. For this reason, a peer from outside of the surgical
 discipline can often be helpful. These individuals should be
 trained on how to respond and provide nonjudgmental sup-
 port to peers who are struggling, focusing on emotions rather
 than the technical components or clinical details of the case.
 Peer support programs are not protected by law, so if the
 adverse event ends in legal action, a peer supporter may be
 called on to testify about any discussion between themselves
784   R. Gates and C. Paget

and the surgeon they are supporting. As such, it may be help-
ful to discuss a proposed peer support program with legal or
risk management departments at your institution to mitigate
these risks as much as possible [27]. Once peer supporters are
trained, a notification system must be designed in which peer
supporters are mobilized. A multifaceted approach with
email, text, call, or survey options is likely most effective. For
most efficient mobilization of resources, there should be an
individual (surgeon or support staff) who acts as the initial
point of contact and triages requests appropriately. In this
type of system, there may be times that a peer supporter does
not suffice, and the type of support must be escalated to a
provider such as a licensed counselor or psychiatrist. In some
cases, the struggling physician may even need to be referred
to the emergency department. Peer supporters/coaches
should be trained to identify signs of distress that may repre-
sent the need for a higher level of care.
   An alternative approach is primarily referring struggling
surgeons to non-peer counselors, often licensed professional
counselors. This system functions much the same as a peer
support program but can support a larger multidisciplinary
system. Individuals (surgeons, nurses, pharmacy technicians,
etc.) who are struggling with an adverse event are identified
in much the same way as previously described, via self or
peer identification. A central point of contact is notified and
mobilizes a counselor to reach out to the specified individ-
ual. This is the method used at the authors’ institution by the
TRUST team, housed within the Employee Assistance
Program. In addition to self-identification or peer identifica-
tion, individuals who could potentially be in crisis are identi-
fied via a standard reporting system for adverse events. At
our institution, “SafeWatch” reports are identifiable or
anonymous reports of adverse events or events felt by the
reporter to represent a “near miss.” SafeWatch reports are
routed to the TRUST team who uses the information to
identify individuals who may be at risk for experiencing
personal distress related to the event. This process of actively
identifying at-risk individuals rather than relying on referrals
        Chapter 40. The Surgeon as Collateral Damage…                            785

has significantly increased the outreach of the TRUST team,
with more individuals accepting support after these adverse
experiences (Fig. 40.3).
   Regardless of the system, it is paramount that surgeons in
leadership roles validate the experiences of second victims
and encourage colleagues to seek assistance if needed. After
the support system is designed, it must be publicized and
surgeons must feel comfortable utilizing it. The system should
be frequently re-examined and improved, using participant
feedback as a pillar of evaluation. In a peer support system, it
is also important to ensure that the peer supporters are ade-
quately supported themselves.




                          Identification of surgeons in need -
                         self/peer identification +/- automated
                         referrals from event reporting system




                                       Effective
                                 systematic support
                                    of colleagues
                                   struggling with
                                   adverse event                   Increasing
     Training of peer                                             awareness of
      supporters +/-                                                 system,
     identification of                                             continuous
       counselors                                                    process
                                                                  improvement




Figure 40.3 System design
786   R. Gates and C. Paget

                 Food for Thought What resources are
                 available at your institution or within your
                 department for individuals who are
                 struggling on a personal level with a
professional outcome? Are there any? If not, consider being
the physician champion of this issue and recruit a group of
other leaders to advocate for availability of peer support
programs, counseling, etc. Be a voice for your surgical and
medical colleagues who are struggling.



 ecommendations for Practice at a Practice
R
Group Level
Much more difficult than creating this at an institutional
level is creating a stripped-down version for use at a local
level. The same principles apply. The first step is creating a
just culture within your practice group where human error
is not punished but is supported. This requires that the
group acknowledge that supporting one another is a vital
function of the group – at least as important as the financial
and call sharing aspects. The onus is on the partners within
the group to be aware of complications and emotional reac-
tions of others and to proactively address these with the
affected surgeon. Secondary identification of resources that
are available within your own community must also be part
of this plan. The mantra that applies is “I am my brother’s
keeper,” similar to the “no man left behind” mentality in
the military. Unfortunately, this concept has been sorely
missed in medicine. Utilizing a “strength in numbers” phi-
losophy will allow the group to support its members and
lessen the impact of poor patient outcomes on the
provider.
        Chapter 40. The Surgeon as Collateral Damage…          787

Recommendations at a Personal Level
First, you must accept that as a surgeon, you and your fellow
healthcare workers are at risk from the emotional collateral
damage related to perceived medical mistakes. Second, you
must commit to look for this in others and honestly attempt
to help individuals in need. Finally, you must develop self-
awareness to recognize when you are not “all right.” This is
not an easy task and is why the most successful assistance
programs have looked for peers and others to recognize care-
givers that have been affected. Despite the difficulty, a sur-
geon can remain introspective enough on multiple levels and
realize that this fragility exists in all of us and that we are not
invincible. The realization that experiencing emotional tur-
moil after an adverse event is a real risk and can be met in an
affirmative manner can become an empowering and thought-
ful way to remain mentally healthy for both our patients and
our families.


Addressing Challenges
As with any intervention, programs are most successful when
there is buy-in at a high level and a highly respected individ-
ual acknowledges the need for recognizing and supporting
medical personnel affected by the second victim phenome-
non. Our institution has been fortunate as our Chief Medical
Officer is both an advocate and an expert with this issue.
Furthermore, more locally within the Department of Surgery,
both the Chair and the General Surgery Residency Program
Director remain advocates of surgeon wellness. This can be
duplicated elsewhere and in many different situations and
institutions by seeking similar champions and enlisting exist-
ing departments such as Employee Assistance Programs.
When encountering resistance or apathy, going back to the
788   R. Gates and C. Paget

principles of just culture and improvement in provider well-
ness can be helpful. The association of provider wellness with
improving retention, decreasing adverse outcomes and
improving patient satisfaction are values that all within
healthcare embrace.


Conclusions
The second victim phenomenon is a recently recognized and
easily identified risk to medical providers. Surgeons are at
particular risk given the type of care provided and the rela-
tively frequent interaction with patients who have poor or
less than ideal outcomes. Further, surgeons by their very
nature assume ownership of their complications which can
increase emotional turmoil after such an event. Recognition
of the need to help the second victim to maximize provider
wellness and subsequently improve patient care is an impor-
tant concept of the new millennium. Successful programs at
the institutional level that proactively identify and provide
support are ideal, but the principles can be applied at more
local levels as well. Part and parcel of successful support for
the second victim is maintaining a just culture within the
healthcare arena such that human error is not punished but
rather the individuals involved in adverse events supported.
Surgeons who are acknowledged leaders within their health-
care systems are ideally suited to champion this concept.
   Special thanks are given to Dr. Patrice Weiss, internation-
ally recognized in this area, for sharing her expertise and
Neeley Connor, for her insight into creation of the TRUST
team and its ongoing function at Carilion Clinic.
   All images were created by the authors using ideas
reflected in the sources credited in the figure title. The “food
for thought” image was created using images listed as public
domain (https://svgsilh.com/image/3246711.html; https://svg-
silh.com/ms/3f51b5/image/310559.html).
        Chapter 40. The Surgeon as Collateral Damage…             789

References
 1. Wu, A. W. (2000). Medical error: the second victim: the doctor
    who makes the mistake needs help too.
 2. Han K, Bohnen JD, Peponis T, Martinez M, Nandan A, Yeh DD,
    et al. The surgeon as the second victim? Results of the Boston
    intraoperative adverse events surgeons' attitude (BISA) study. J
    Am Coll Surg. 2017;224(6):1048–56.
 3. Seys D, Wu AW, Van Gerven E, Vleugels A, Euwema M, Panella
    M, Scott SD, Conway J, Sermeus W, Vanhaecht K. Health care
    professionals as second victims after adverse events: a sys-
    tematic review. Eval Health Prof. 2013;36(2):135–62. https://
    doi.org/10.1177/0163278712458918. Epub 2012 Sep 12. PMID:
    22976126.
 4. Makary MA, Daniel M. Medical error—the third leading cause
    of death in the US. BMJ. 2016;353
 5. Lives SSS. The second global patient safety challenge. World
    Health Organization; 2008.
 6. Waterman AD, Garbutt J, Hazel E, Dunagan WC, Levinson
    W, Fraser VJ, Gallagher TH. The emotional impact of medical
    errors on practicing physicians in the United States and Canada.
    Jt Comm J Qual Patient Saf. 2007;33(8):467–76.
 7. Scott SD, Hirschinger LE, Cox KR, McCoig M, Brandt J, Hall
    LW. The natural history of recovery for the healthcare provider
    “second victim” after adverse patient events. BMJ Quality &
    Safety. 2009;18(5):325–30.
 8. Blatt SJ. The destructiveness of perfectionism: implications for
    the treatment of depression. Am Psychol. 1995;50(12):1003.
 9. Kiamanesh P, Dieserud G, Dyregrov K, Haavind H. Maladaptive
    perfectionism: understanding the psychological vulnerability to
    suicide in terms of developmental history. OMEGA-J Death
    Dying. 2015;71(2):126–45.
10. Peters M, King J. 2012. Perfectionism in doctors. https://nam.edu/
    initiatives/clinician_resilience_and_well_being/.
11. Cabilan CJ, Kynoch K. Experiences of and support for nurses
    as second victims of adverse nursing errors: a qualitative sys-
    tematic review. JBI Database System Rev Implement Rep.
    2017;15(9):2333–64.
790    R. Gates and C. Paget

12. Shanafelt TD, Balch CM, Bechamps G, Russell T, Dyrbye L,
    Satele D, et al. Burnout and medical errors among American
    surgeons. Ann Surg. 2010;251(6):995–1000.
13. Jackson T, Zhou C, Khorgami Z, Jackson D, Agrawal V, Taubman
    K, et al. Traumatized residents—It's not surgery. It's medicine. J
    Surg Educ. 2019;76(6):e30–40.
14. O’Connor LE, Berry JW, Lewis TB, Stiver DJ. Empathy-based
    pathogenic guilt, pathological altruism, and psychopathology.
    Pathological Altruism. 2012:10–30.
15. Chen PW. Doctor and patient: when doctors make mistakes.
    New York Times; 2017.
16. West CP, Huschka MM, Novotny PJ, Sloan JA, Kolars JC,
    Habermann TM, Shanafelt TD. Association of perceived medi-
    cal errors with resident distress and empathy: a prospective
    longitudinal study. JAMA. 2006;296(9):1071–8.
17. Gupta K, Lisker S, Rivadeneira N, Mangurian C, Linos E, Sarkar
    U. Save Dr Mom: second adverse event victim experiences: deci-
    sions and repercussions for mothers in medicine. In: Journal of
    general internal medicine (Vol. 33). 233 Spring ST, New York,
    NY 10013 USA: Springer; 2018. p. S334.
18. Shanafelt TD, Balch CM, Dyrbye L, Bechamps G, Russell T,
    Satele D, et al. Special report: suicidal ideation among American
    surgeons. Arch Surg. 2011;146(1):54–62.
19. Robertson JJ, Long B. Suffering in silence: medical error and its
    impact on health care providers. J Emerg Med. 2018;54(4):402–9.
20. Marx D. Patient safety and the “just culture”: a primer for health
    care executives. New York (NY): Columbia University; 2001.
    p. 2001.
21. Denham CR. TRUST: the 5 rights of the second victim. J Patient
    Saf. 2007;3(2):107–19.
22. Hu YY, Fix ML, Hevelone ND, Lipsitz SR, Greenberg CC,
    Weissman JS, Shapiro J. Physicians' needs in coping with
    emotional stressors: the case for peer support. Arch Surg.
    2012;147(3):212–7.
23. Sanfey H, Fromson J, Mellinger J, Rakinic J, Williams M,
    Williams B. Surgeons in difficulty: an exploration of differences
    in assistance-seeking behaviors between male and female sur-
    geons. J Am Coll Surg. 2015;221(2):621–7.
24. El Hechi MW, Bohnen JD, Westfal M, Han K, Cauley C, Wright
    C, et al. Design and impact of a novel surgery-specific second vic-
    tim peer support program. J Am Coll Surg. 2020;230(6):926–33.
        Chapter 40. The Surgeon as Collateral Damage…        791

25. Merandi J, Liao N, Lewe D, Morvay S, Stewart B, Catt C, Scott
    SD. Deployment of a second victim peer support program: a
    replication study. Pediatric Quality & Safety. 2017;2(4)
26. Edrees H, Connors C, Paine L, Norvell M, Taylor H, Wu
    AW. Implementing the RISE second victim support programme
    at the Johns Hopkins Hospital: a case study. BMJ Open.
    2016;6(9)
27. Lane MA, Newman BM, Taylor MZ, O’Neill M, Ghetti C,
    Woltman RM, Waterman AD. Supporting clinicians after
    adverse events: development of a clinician peer support pro-
    gram. J Patient Saf. 2018;14(3):e56.
Chapter 41
The Surgeon in Decline:
Can We Assess and Train
a Surgeon as Their Skills
Deteriorate?
Arthur Rawlings


Introduction
Ferdinand Sauerbruch (1875–1951) was held in high esteem
in his lifetime as an outstanding surgeon. Internationally
known, students and patients from far and wide traveled to
Berlin to learn or receive care from his brilliant mind and
gifted hands. Later in his career, colleagues voiced concern as
they saw his demeanor change and his skills decline. At 74, he
finally retired from the hospital (the alternative was the
humiliation of a public dismissal), only to move his practice
to his home with very unfavorable results [1].
   Almost 70 years later, we are still wrestling with how to
appropriately address a surgeon whose skills are in decline.
With the aging of the US population, there is also an aging of
the surgical workforce with 25% of surgeons above 65 years
old in the United States, 19% in Australia and New Zealand,
and 9% in the United Kingdom [2, 3]. Skills decline not only


A. Rawlings (*)
General Surgery, University of Missouri, One Hospital Drive,
Columbia, MO, USA

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature    793
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_41
794   A. Rawlings

as age increases but also from medical conditions. The major-
ity of the following discussion focuses on the decline of skills
with aging as every practicing surgeon will face this issue,
unless they opt for early retirement.


What Skills Are Needed?
According to Astley Paston Cooper (1768–1841), the surgeon
needs “an eagle’s eye, a lady’s hand, and a lion’s heart” but,
above all, a hard-fought knowledge of human anatomy [4].
The surgeon must have adequate visual-perceptual skills and
fine motor skills to perform surgery safely, recall information
(short-term and long-term memory) as well as apply both
analytical and non-analytical reasoning to the surgical condi-
tion of the patient [5]. The passion and desire to help others
is critical to success. The lack of heart will not be discussed in
this chapter but is no less important than the hand or eye of
the surgeon.


How Do We Know They Are Ready to Start?
No one is born a surgeon. A surgeon is made through pro-
longed personal dedication by an individual who desires to
be a surgeon by submitting to training done mostly by those
who are already surgeons. Looking at the development of a
surgeon and the determination that a surgeon is ready to be
released on the public may give some insight to addressing
the surgeon in decline. Is it not reasonable that the bar
should be the same for when one is able to enter into an
independent practice as it is when one should end an inde-
pendent practice?
   Chapter 41.   The Surgeon in Decline: Can We Assess…     795

 linical Skills In and Out of the
C
Operating Room
During residency, and for many followed by fellowship, a
developing surgeon in the United States is assessed by prac-
ticing surgeons on a daily basis with informal feedback given
periodically with at least one formal feedback session
required by the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical
Education (ACGME) every 6 months. After successful com-
pletion of at least 5 years of Graduate Medical Education
(GME), a trained individual could practice as a general sur-
geon. Other skills are required such as passing Advance
Cardiac Life Support (ACLS), Advanced Trauma Life
Support (ATLS), Fundamentals of Laparoscopic Surgery
(FLS), and Fundamentals of Endoscopic Surgery (FES)
before a program director can affirm that the resident is able
to take the American Board of Surgery (ABS) Qualifying
Exam, the penultimate assessment of knowledge. After pass-
ing the Qualifying Exam (QE), the ultimate assessment is the
Certifying Exam (CE), which merits board certification if
completed successfully. These two exams assess recall of
information and clinical reasoning skills, the surgeon’s head.
    The developing surgeon’s hands are assessed by FLS and
FES, neither of which are sufficient in and of themselves for
independent practice. More importantly, there is reliance
upon a variety of faculty, each of which contribute to training,
observing, and ultimately assessing the trainee, which truly
determines when a trainee is ready for unsupervised practice.
At the end of training, the program director verifies to the
ABS that the skills observed – recall of knowledge, clinical
reasoning, and operative ability – are sufficient for the indi-
vidual to be eligible for board certification. Unlike assessing
knowledge and reasoning skills with the QE and CE, there is
no manual dexterity skills test to verify that a person can
operate except that the person is observed to operate by fac-
ulty during training.
796   A. Rawlings

The Toll of Time
The presumption is that all residents who finish an ACGME
training program are skilled enough in surgery to serve the
general public and enter into an unsupervised practice. Board
certification is not necessary to practice surgery in the United
States, though it might be for credentialing in some locations.
Those skills learned in training are expected to improve with
time as graduates are now tackling cases independently and
making clinical decisions for which they are solely account-
able. The current ACGME General Surgery Milestones by
which a resident’s progress is reported are designed with the
expectation that graduates will improve as level 5 of the
Milestones “represents an expert resident whose achieve-
ments…are greater than the expectation” [5]. But what hap-
pens as more time passes? The question is whether skills
continue to improve throughout one’s career or there is a
“U-shaped” performance curve.
   Undoubtedly, there is a physical decline for everyone as
the years advance. As a general characterization, vision and
hearing decline with age. Visuospatial ability along with
inductive reasoning and verbal memory all wane over time.
One’s stamina decreases as does fine-motor skills and the
ability to tune out visual or auditory distractions [3, 6, 7]. The
problem is that these declines vary from person to person
with the variability in decline increasing with age [8, 9]. If this
is true for the general population, how could a surgeon be
exempt? [10]


Do Surgeons Decline?
When it comes to medical knowledge, decline with aging is
easier to establish. Medical knowledge for board certification
is tested with a written and oral examination. Prior to switch-
ing to the Maintenance of Certification process by the ABS,
recertification to remain board certified required passing a
written examination every 10 years. For the recertification
   Chapter 41.   The Surgeon in Decline: Can We Assess…    797

examination, the failure rate for those at 10 years was 3.4%,
at 20 years was 7.9%, at 30 years was 10.9%, and at 40 was
22% [11]. There may be confounding factors such as older
surgeons having a narrower practice or have a less pressing
need to do well because of dual board certification, yet the
increasing failure rate should be noted. The Cognitive
Changes and Retirement among Senior Surgeons (CCRASS)
study demonstrated age-related cognitive decline in all areas
studied, which were attention, reaction time, visual learning,
and memory [12]. When it comes to decline in cognitive abil-
ity with age, surgeons are not exempt.
   Operative skills, which would include performance in the
operating room as well as clinical judgment before and after
the operation, are more difficult to assess. There currently is
no manual dexterity skills test that a practicing surgeon has
to take on a periodic basis to establish retention of operative
abilities after finishing training like there is for medical
knowledge. So, there is nothing to directly examine like the
recertification pass rate to establish operative decline. One
surrogate approach is to look at outcomes of surgeries –
death, morbidity, and readmissions – based on the age of the
surgeon. There are mixed reports using this approach. On the
one hand, there are studies that raise concern over declining
outcomes in relation to a surgeon’s age. In a review of 12,725
cases of a carotid endarterectomy from the 284 nonfederal
Pennsylvania hospitals, years since licensure was associated
with a greater mortality. There was no association of years
since licensure and morbidity, though low patient volume
was associated with an increased morbidity in the study [13].
When looking at the Medicare files of 461,000 patients
undergoing 1 of 8 procedures and comparing the mortality of
surgeons 40 years old and younger with those 41–50, 51–60,
and over 60, mortality was only increased for pancreatec-
tomy, coronary artery bypass grafting, and carotid enterec-
tomy when done by surgeons over 60. This was mainly
restricted for surgeons with low volumes and was not dem-
onstrated in several other complex surgeries such as an
esophagectomy [14].
798   A. Rawlings

   On the other hand, there are studies that indicate that
there is no difference in outcome based on surgeon age or
that outcomes may even improve with age. In a study that
compared new and experienced surgeons in 1221 US hospi-
tals, the patients of new surgeons had significantly higher
overall 30-day mortality, but when the patients were matched
on the operation type, emergency admissions status, and com-
plexity, the differences between new and experienced sur-
geons were practically erased [15]. More interestingly, one
study that looked at 25 common surgical procedures in
Canada from 2007 to 2015 of over 1 million patients treated
by over 3000 surgeons from age 27 to 81 found that an
increase in the surgeon’s age was associated with a decrease
in postoperative deaths, readmissions, and complications in
almost a linear fashion when adjusting for patient, procedure,
surgeon, and hospital factors [16]. The problem is that the
study does not take into account the potential self-selection
by surgeons for the cases they perform as they mature. In the
CCRASS trial, for example, surgeons did report that they had
a decrease in caseload and complexity over time [17]. No such
statement was clearly made in the Canadian study. Identifying
whether the decrease in postoperative problems in Canada
was a result of the surgeon’s experience or the surgeon’s self-­
selection for cases cannot be determined. Finally, in a study of
1629 herniorrhaphies in a multicenter, randomized trial com-
paring open and laparoscopic repairs conducted at the
Veterans Administration hospitals, 45-year-old and older
inexperienced surgeons had a higher recurrence rate than
inexperienced surgeons less than 45 years old [18]. Is this a
result of age, experience, or both? So, there is mixed evidence
on the question of the relationship between surgeon age and
patient outcomes. In the end, the outcome is truly the only
metric that matters. If patients receive appropriate care, the
age of the surgeon does not matter.
   As can be seen from the studies stated, there is a decline in
cognitive skills and motor function as a surgeon ages, but the
variability of the decline as one ages increases, making it
practically impossible to develop a standard decline curve
   Chapter 41.   The Surgeon in Decline: Can We Assess…     799

that applies to all individuals. There are always outliers. One
person may suffer from a significant decline in eyesight while
retaining manual dexterity, while another may retain eyesight
yet suffer from dementia. Surgical outcomes, what truly mat-
ters to the patient, do not appear directly to decrease based
upon age. It is difficult to convincingly say if outcomes
improve, remain the same, or decline, based more on patient
selection, case volume, and restrained practices the more a
surgeon ages. In other words, there is just no standard decline
curve of aging that can be superimposed on every single sur-
geon. The problem is that the decline is dependent on many
factors such as genetics, general health, and self-care.
Generalizations about decline can be made, but the direct
application to an individual surgeon is not possible. This is
why age-based decisions such as retirement are fraught with
concern. Such a situation should not be a surprise. Many
families in the United States are challenged with the transi-
tion of parents into dependent situations, such as the decision
of letting them drive or not. The decision is rarely age based,
but is made by considering a parent’s eyesight, memory, rea-
soning skills, reaction time, mobility, etc. There is no decline
curve based on age that determines when a person has to
hand over the keys; similarly, there is not one for when a sur-
geon should hand over the scalpel. But, as has already been
observed, “in many states it is more difficult to maintain one’s
driving privileges than one’s surgical privileges” [19]. Such
observation should give the surgical community pause.


Are Assessments Available?
As stated earlier, one enters into the public practice of sur-
gery by passing a qualifying skills exam. The operative skills
in a trainee are assessed by multiple observations by multiple
surgeons. The determination of a practicing surgeon should
likely be the same. There are two problems with such an
assessment in a practicing surgeon. The first is making the
observations in an unbiased fashion. The second is in deciding
800   A. Rawlings

where the bar of performance should be located. This is true
for deciding if one is ready to graduate from training. It is also
true for those out in practice. The bottom line is that patients
do not care how well you can perform in a trainer box but
how well you do with their body.


Assessment of the Surgeon’s Head
In an office setting, there are some quick tests that have been
developed to screen for dementia. The prevalence of demen-
tia for individuals over 65 is reported as between 3% and
11%. The Mini-Mental State Exam and Clock-Drawing Test
may help detect cognitive impairment, but physicians, in gen-
eral, can often mask early mild cognitive impairment because
of their training and cognitive reserve making such tests less
useful in that setting [20]. The Montreal Cognitive Assessment
(MoCA) is another brief screening exam that measures ver-
bal, numerical, and word recall. There is a visuospatial skills,
clock-face, and naming component to it as well. Again, this is
a screening tool and has not been validated to predict the safe
performance of surgery [21].
   MicroCog, which has become the more used tool, is a
computer-based test that assesses processing speed and accu-
racy using questions. Some are simple math while others test
the ability to recall information from a short story. This hour-­
long test examines the five domains of attention and mental
control, memory, reasoning and calculation, spatial process-
ing, and reaction time. This is only a screening test. MicroCog
has a demonstrated sensitivity of 0.83 and a specificity of 0.96,
which means there is a 17% false negative rate and a 4% false
positive rate [22]; thus, poor performance on the MicroCog
should only lead to further testing [23].
   In assessing the surgeon, one factor that is critical is having
the correct normative controls [24]. It has been shown, for
example, that surgeons that underwent three tests selected
from the Cambridge Neuropsychological Test Automated
Battery (CANTAB) test – the Reaction Time test (RTI), the
   Chapter 41.   The Surgeon in Decline: Can We Assess…     801

Rapid Visual Information Processing (RVIP) test, and the
Visual Paired Associates Learning (VPAL) test – did demon-
strate a decline in performance when comparing medical
students (age 20–35), midcareer surgeons (age 45–60), and
senior practicing surgeons (age 61–75). However, surgeon
group performance was significantly better when compared
with age-matched normative controls [25]. Dr. Lauri Korinek,
whose PhD dissertation is in the field, has indicated that even
though the MicroCog is a well-normed test for the general
public, there are no norms for physicians. And, should the
norms for a practicing surgeon be linked with scores of sur-
geons of the same age, or should it be linked to norms deter-
mined appropriate for any surgeon to be in practice? Or as
Dr. Blaiser has pointed out, “there has not been any showing
that a good score on the MicroCog correlates with good per-
formance of surgery or that a low score on the MicroCog
correlates with incompetency or lack of skill” [23]. This raises
the question of what should the norms be for such testing and
how is that to be established.
   Though not studied as well as the cognitive domain, motor
skills of a surgeon need an appropriate norm as well if they
are going to be evaluated. For example, the CCRASS study
noted that there was an expected cognitive decline in all mea-
sures based on age, but the reaction time was notably better
than age-appropriate norms [12]. When practicing senior
surgeons in the study were compared with their younger
counterparts, though, the majority of them performed at or
near their younger peers on all cognitive tasks suggesting that
older age does not assure cognitive deficiency [26].
   In Sherwood and Bismark’s qualitative study of expert
opinion on assessing the performance of aging surgeons, 52
experts hailing from 4 countries spoke about the lack of vali-
dated tools for assessing surgical performance. The online
appendix to their work has a table listing ten different assess-
ment methods along with respective issues or concerns,
strengths, and limitations of each one. For example, direct
observation of procedural skills as an assessment method is
useful for the technical domains of surgery. The strengths are
802   A. Rawlings

that there can be a clear scoring criterion with targeted feed-
back and a quantifiable future reassessment. However, the
approach suffers from potential Hawthorne effect and
requires trained observers for quantifiable data. None are
validated for assessing surgical performance making it neces-
sary to continue to develop robust processes to assess perfor-
mance [27].


Turning Back the Clock
As stated in the introduction, there are two areas to discuss
when it comes to trying to turn back the clock on a surgeon’s
decline: cognition and operative skills. First, when a concern
for a cognitive decline is raised, the decline needs to be inves-
tigated, and, if present, the source of that decline needs to be
ascertained. There are impairments brought on by depres-
sion, substance abuse, alcoholism, and stressful life events
that can be improved through proper treatment and atten-
tion. With appropriate intervention, any one of these can be
time-limited allowing the surgeon to return to full function
[20]. Dementia, on the other hand, is the erosion of cognitive
ability that currently cannot be corrected. That is why the
investigation of cognitive concerns is so critical. Correction
could be as straightforward as developing a more humane
call schedule [28]. It may mean resources to help with an
addiction such as alcohol. Or, it could mean the beginning of
the end of a career as in the case of dementia. The one area
where the surgeon will need to accept the passage of time is
the development of mild cognitive impairment. Unfortunately,
this is a road that has no U-turn once one starts down it. The
discovery of mild cognitive impairment through testing needs
to be handled with grace, helping the surgeon transition out
of practice with the dignity that everyone should be treated
with when confronted with this diagnosis.
   The second area is operative skills. If the deficiency is a
lack of training on a new technique or procedure, then part-
nering with another surgeon to mentor one through the
   Chapter 41.   The Surgeon in Decline: Can We Assess…      803

learning curve is appropriate. This is how one learned surgery
during residency in the first place. If the deficiency is from an
intrinsic source, then the regaining of an appropriate skill
level maybe possible. Undoubtedly, some athletes have
recovered from a horrendous life-altering disease or signifi-
cant trauma to go on to inspire others with a world-class
performance. But that is likely the exception and not the rule.
It is possible that there are surgeons that have recovered
skills once lost by an accident or a health-related event, but
such recoveries are so individualized that using them as a
model for the general practice of surgery seems impractical at
best.


Suggestions for Practice Groups and Hospitals
For the near future, the aging of the American population
and the surgical workforce is inevitable. There might be areas
in the world where this topic is avoidable in the short term,
but not in most developed countries that do not have a man-
datory retirement age. Even in those countries, there are
surgeons whose decline precedes the retirement age, and so
the concern of the practicing surgeon in decline is unavoid-
able. The primary principle is that oversight and intervention
of the surgeon in decline should happen before a patient gets
hurt [20]. Unfortunately, sometimes an investigation is only
triggered after there is a complaint or patient injury [29]. It
would be valuable to detect and assist the surgeon in decline,
prior to a patient safety issue [30].
   Establishing a mandatory retirement for surgeons is
tempting and would be a simple solution, but would be illegal,
inappropriate, and unfair in the United States [31]. Though
decline is inevitable, the variability of that decline based upon
age and the variability of decline in specific areas of ability
needed to provide good patient care preclude a blanket
retirement policy based upon age. It would be unfair for sur-
geons whose abilities would allow them to practice compe-
tently beyond that age, and it would be unfair to patients who
804   A. Rawlings

need those services. It would also be unfair to both parties as
there would be surgeons whose decline preceded that retire-
ment date and should be retired from practice earlier than
mandated. With a mandatory retirement date not an option,
what can practice groups or hospitals do to detect and help
the surgeon in decline?
   First, there must be an acknowledgement that there is a
lack of validated tools for assessing a surgeon’s performance.
If such assessments were available, training programs would
already be incorporating them into graduation requirements.
The most commonly proposed assessments are multisource
feedback, direct observation, analysis of data to discover out-
liers or changes over time, self-evaluation, and cognitive
assessment. Each approach has its own strengths and weak-
nesses. All of them are adequate when evaluating surgeon
performance that is significantly above or below what is
acceptable. None has the ability in and of itself to declare
with fine precision who should and who should not continue
to operate when the surgeon is at the line where it could go
either way. In other words, it is easy to determine who should
continue to operate or stop when there is a catastrophic event
like a stroke and retirement is obvious to all. It is not easy to
determine when a surgeon falls below the line when there is
a slow decline.
   Second, institutions should be aware that decline with the
passage of time is not readily recognized in oneself as a sur-
geon, nor are colleagues eager to report the impairment of a
fellow colleague. The CCRASS study demonstrated that
there was “no notable relationship, however, between
subjective cognitive change and objective cognitive mea-
­
sures” [32]. Even though there was a measurable decline in
cognitive skills, visual learning, and memory with age, retire-
ment decisions based on subjective cognitive awareness may
not accurately reflect objective cognitive abilities leading
some to retire to early while encouraging others to practice
longer than they should. Even though institutions may
encourage surgeons to practice good self-care and volunteer
reporting for testing when decline is self-perceived, institutions
   Chapter 41.   The Surgeon in Decline: Can We Assess…    805

should not rely upon surgeons doing so [33]. For example, the
American College of Surgeons recommends voluntary physi-
cal examination, eye examination, and online screening tests
of cognition for surgeons between ages 65 and 70 [34].
Currently, this is not a mandate, and this does not mean that
all surgeons in that age group will thus comply. Also, a
national survey on professionalism suggested that, although
the majority of those surveyed (96%) believed that an
impaired colleague should be reported, 45% of those who
knew of such a colleague had not reported the impairment
[35]. That is why mechanisms other than self-reporting of
decline need to be in place for institutions to protect patients
and surgeons from untoward events because of decline.
   Third, a decision does need to be made about mandatory
testing. The options are a “whole of career” testing, an age-­
based trigger, and an incidence-based trigger. A whole of
career testing approach does eliminate any concern over age-­
based discrimination but does seem less cost-effective for the
institution. An age-based trigger could make testing more
cost-effective, but this is a concern in the United States as at
least two court cases have ruled against it based upon the Age
Discrimination in Employment Act [36]. As of 2016, though,
it was estimated that 5% of the US medical centers have
developed age-based triggers for screening [6]. An incidence-­
based trigger should be a part of every institutional policy.
There are many reasons to launch an investigation into a
surgeon’s practice besides chronology. The institution should
have an established and adhered to routine of collecting data
on practitioners such as outcomes, operative times, readmis-
sions, infections, etc. Deviations from established norms in
these categories should initiate a look into the reasons for
them. This is also true for patient and staff complaints [21].
   Fourth, there needs to be the establishment of local norms
for practice. In the same way institutions establish norms for
informed consent and preoperative antibiotics in the hospital,
local norms for clinical practice can be established as well.
What are the local institutional norms for wound infections,
OR time for index cases, readmissions, etc.? If it is true that
806   A. Rawlings

skills are “U-shaped” throughout one’s career, it would be
important for a surgeon to be assessed in competency with
the beginning of one’s career and not at the apex of the
career. It is easy to say that a surgeon is not as good as the
surgeon once was, but that does not mean that the surgeon is
not safe enough to continue in practice. Establishing institu-
tional norms, applicable to surgeons regardless of where they
are in their career, would make the assessment of a surgeon
in decline appropriate and fair.
   Fifth, the development of a well-thought-out process for
evaluation and determination of clinical privileges is needed.
Regardless of the trigger for an assessment, the process
should be as objective as possible, fair, and appropriately
normed. For example, it is not appropriate to dismiss a sur-
geon just because of a decline in ability. The surgeon may not
be as good as the surgeon once was, but the surgeon may still
be better than any recent graduate. In other words, the bar to
enter practice should be the same as the one to force a person
to exit a practice. There are at least ten assessment centers
that will offer testing [20]. Multidisciplinary, objective, and
confidential evaluation of a surgeon’s physical and cognitive
function can be obtained through an independent agency, but
such agencies only provide a report to the surgeon’s hospital
of the surgeon’s performance of the evaluation. The decision
to continue with full privileges or privileges with some forms
of restriction is left up to the hospital medical staff.
   Sixth, the evaluation process should end with a clear deter-
mination of the surgeon’s future. Since decline is so individu-
alized, the way forward for each surgeon is different as well.
The options for the institution are a return to full practice,
remediation, restriction, and retirement. It may not be possi-
ble to turn back the clock, but the clock can be slowed down
by deferring on longer, more challenging cases, reducing
amount or frequency of call and workload to a less stressful
pace. Such alterations may keep a surgeon in practice for
longer time but will need a supportive environment to imple-
ment these changes. This maybe more palatable if the
   Chapter 41.   The Surgeon in Decline: Can We Assess…     807

seasoned surgeon is perceived as a mentor resource for the
younger surgeons who desire to benefit from years of experi-
ence and wisdom.
   Finally, each individual practice group and hospital should
have a well-thought-out and documented policy to address-
ing this issue of the surgeon in decline. There should also be
a retirement policy. The hospital or surgical group should col-
lect the appropriate data of surgical activity and outcomes in
order to track outcomes and make such data available to
individual surgeons. Validated tools for assessment should be
developed. Remediation or rehabilitation should be offered
to those whom would benefit, or work patterns should be
changed when necessary to support safe practices. And, at
some time every surgeon will stop operating. Having a policy
that details a pathway to retirement if the surgeon is in
decline or not may be helpful for the surgeon and institution
or practice group [37]. For example, the policy may have a
provision that the surgeon is able to have no call the last year
of practice. That would allow the surgeon to wind down the
practice while also giving the institution or group a year’s
notice that a new surgeon will need to be hired. These policies
should incorporate the above discussion and must be compli-
ant with any local, state, and federal policies and laws.


Conclusion
There is no short and easy answer to evaluating and deter-
mining what to do with the surgeon in decline. It would be
convenient if there were cognitive testing and manual
­dexterity testing that could determine if a person was safe to
 continue to be a surgeon. Residency programs would use
 these tools to launch a surgeon’s career, and institutions and
 practice groups would use them to end a surgeon’s career.
 When age or disease brings incremental decline, the decision
 to remove the scalpel from a surgeon’s hand is complex,
 should be made by peers based on robust observations as
808    A. Rawlings

well as input from independent assessment, and should be
handled firmly yet with the grace deserved by a surgeon who
has spent a career wielding the scalpel for the betterment of
the patients the surgeon served.


References
 1. Cherian S, Nicks R, Lord R. Ernst Ferdinand Sauerbuch:
    rise and fall of the pioneer of thoracic surgery. World J Surg.
    2001;25(8):1012–20.
 2. Kurek N, Darzi A. The ageing surgeon. BMJ Qual Saf.
    2020;29(2):95–7.
 3. Schenarts P, Cemaj S. The aging surgeon implications for the
    workforce, the surgeon, and the patient. Surg Clin N Am.
    2016;96(1):129–38.
 4. Bell A. The anatomy of Astley. Lancet. 2007;369(9572):1510.
 5. ACGME Surgery Milestones, Second Revision: January 2019.
    Accessed on Mar 14, 2021 at https://www.acgme.org/Portals/0/
    PDFs/Milestones/SurgeryMilestones.pdf?ver=2020-­0 9-­0 1-­
    152718-­110.
 6. Kaups K. Competency not age determines ability to practice:
    ethical considerations about sensorimotor agility, dexterity, and
    cognitive capacity. AMA J Ethics. 2016;18(10):1017–24.
 7. Mani T, Bedwell J, Miller L. Age-related decrements in per-
    formance on a brief continuous performance test. Arch Clin
    Neuropsychol. 2005;20(5):575–86.
 8. Dellinger E, Pellegrini C, Gallagher T. The aging physician and the
    medical profession: a review. JAMA Surg. 2017;152(10):967–71.
 9. Durning S, Artino A, Holmboe E, Beckman T, van der Vleuten
    C, Schuwirth L. Aging and cognitive performance: challenges
    and implications for physicians practicing in the 21st century. J
    Contin Educ Health Prof. 2010;30(3):153–60.
10. Beekman A. Aging affects us all: aging physicians and screening
    for impaired professional proficiency. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry.
    2018;26(6):641–2.
11. Buyske J. Forks in the road: the assessment of surgeons from
    the American Board of Surgery perspective. Surg Clin N Am.
    2016;96(1):139–46.
   Chapter 41.   The Surgeon in Decline: Can We Assess…           809

12. Bieliauskas L, Langenecker S, Graver C, Jin Lee H, O’Neill J,
    Greenfield L. Cognitive changes and retirement among senior
    surgeons (CRASS): results from the CRASS study. J Am Coll
    Surg. 2008;207(1):69–78.
13. O’Neill L, Lanska D, Hartz A. Surgeon characteristics associated
    with mortality and morbidity following carotid endarteredtomy.
    Neurology. 2000;55(6):773–81.
14. Waljee J, Greenfield J, Dimick J, Birkmeyer J. Surgeon age
    and operative mortality in the United States. Ann Surg.
    2006;244(3):353–62.
15. Kelz R, Sellers M, Niknam B, Sharpe J, Rosenbaum P, Hill A,
    Zhou H, Hochman L, Bilimoria K, Itani K, Romano P, Silber J. A
    national comparison of operative outcomes of new and experi-
    enced surgeons. Ann Surg. 2021;273(2):280–8.
16. Satkunasivam R, Klaassen Z, Bheeshma R, Kai-Hoi F, Menser T,
    Kash B, Miles B, Bass B, Detsky A, Wallis C. Relation between
    surgeon age and postoperative outcomes: a population-based
    cohort study. CMAJ. 2020;192(15):385–92.
17. Jin Lee H, Drag L, Bieliauskas L, Langenecker S, Graver C,
    O’Neill J, Greenfield L. Results from the cognitive changes and
    retirement among senior surgeons self-report survey. J Am Coll
    Surg. 2009;209(5):668–71.
18. Neumayer L, Gawande A, Wang J, Giobbie-Hurder A, Itani K,
    Fitzgibbons R, Reda D, Jonasson O. Proficiency of surgeons in
    inguinal hernia repair effect of experience and age. Ann Surg.
    2005;242(3):344–51.
19. Katlic M, Coleman J. The aging surgeon. Adv Surg.
    2016;50(1):93–103.
20. LoboPrabhu S, Molinari V, Hamilton J, Lomax J. The aging
    physician with cognitive impairment: approaches to over-
    sight, prevention, and remediation. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry.
    2009;17(6):445–54.
21. Hickson G, Peabody T, Hopkinson W, Reiter C. Cognitive skills
    assessment for the aging orthopaedic surgeon. J Bone Joint Surg
    Am. 2019;101(2):1–5.
22. Korinek L. Neuropsychological differences between physicians
    referred for competency evaluations and a control group of phy-
    sicians. Unpublished dissertation. 2005. p. 86. Accessed on 14 Mar
    2021 at https://assets.documentcloud.org/documents/5980346/
    Lauri-­Korinek-­Dissertation.pdf.
810    A. Rawlings

23. Blasier R. The problem of the aging surgeon: When surgeon
    age becomes a surgical risk factor. Clin Orthop Relat Res.
    2009;467(2):402–11.
24. Williams B, Flanders P, Grace E, Korinek E, Welindt D, Williams
    M. Assessment of fitness for duty of underperforming phy-
    sicians: the importance of using appropriate norms. PLoS
    One. 2017;12(10):e0186902. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
    pone.0186902.
25. Boom-Saad Z, Langenecker S, Bieliauskas L, Graver C, O’Neill
    J, Caveney A, Greenfield L, Minter R. Surgeons outperformed
    normative controls on neuropsychologic tests, but age-related
    decay of skills persists. Am J Surg. 2008;195(2):205–9.
26. Drag L, Bieliauskas L, Langenecker S, Greenfield L. Cognitive
    functioning, retirement status, and age: results from the cognitive
    changes and retirement among senior surgeons study. J Am Coll
    Surg. 2010;211(3):303–7.
27. Sherwood R, Bismark M. The ageing surgeon: a qualitative
    study of expert opinions on assuring performance and support-
    ing safe career transitions among older surgeons. BMJ Qual Saf.
    2020;29(2):113–21.
28. Wesnes K, Walker M, Walker L, Heys S, Warren R, Eremin
    O. Cognitive performance and mood after a weekend on call in
    a surgical unit. Br J Surg. 1997;84(4):493–5.
29. Williams B. The prevalence and special educational require-
    ments of dyscompetent physicians. J Contin Educ Health Prof.
    2006;26(3):173–91.
30. Soonsawat A, Tanaka G, Lammando M, Ahmed I, Ellison
    J. Cognitively impaired physicians: how do we detect them? How
    do we assist them? Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2018;26(6):631–40.
31. Katlic M, Coleman J, Russell M. Assessing the performance of
    aging surgeons. JAMA. 2019;321(5):449–50.
32. Bieliauskas L, Langenecker S, Graver C, Jin Lee H, O’Neil J,
    Greenfield L. Cognitive changes and retirement among senior
    surgeons (CCRASS): results from the CRASS study. J Am Coll
    Surg. 2008;207(1):69–78.
33. Davis D, Mazmanian P, Fordis M, Harrison R, Thorpe K,
    Perrier L. Accuracy of physician self-assessment compared with
    observed measures of competence: a systematic review. JAMA.
    2006;296(9):1094–102.
34. American College of Surgeons (ACS). Statement on the aging
    surgeon. ACS website. Published Jan 1, 2016. Accessed 9 Dec
    2020.
   Chapter 41.   The Surgeon in Decline: Can We Assess…         811

35. Campbell E, Regan S, Gruen R, Ferris T, Rao S, Cleary P,
    Blumenthal D. Professionalism in medicine: results of a national
    survey of physicians. Ann Intern Med. 2007;147(11):795–802.
36. Grandjean B, Grell C. Why no mandatory retirement age
    exists for physicians: important lessons for employers. Mo Med.
    2019;116(5):357–60.
37. Bhatt N, Morris M, O’Neil A, Gillis A, Ridgway P. When should
    surgeons retire? Br J Surg. 2016;103(1):35–42.
Chapter 42
Fatigue in Surgery:
Managing an Unrealistic
Work Burden
V. Prasad Poola, Adam Reid, and John D. Mellinger


Introduction
The condition of chronic fatigue, burnout, or “burnout syn-
drome” is defined as a state of depersonalization (loss of
empathy), emotional exhaustion, and a sense of reduced per-
sonal accomplishment (competence and achievement). Since
Herbert Freudenberger first described symptoms including
exhaustion, headaches, and irritability among volunteers at a
free drug clinic in 1974, as “burnout,” [1] it has grown to
­epidemic proportions, especially among healthcare workers
 [2]. The recent literature suggests worsening work-life bal-
 ance and increasing burnout across all specialties, and surgery
 is no exception [3]. In fact, it is noted that surgeons and surgi-
 cal trainees are more prone to burnout compared to their
 peers in other specialties due to long work hours, stressful
 work environments, and lack of schedule control during their
 prolonged training and beyond. The increasing exhaustion


V. P. Poola · A. Reid · J. D. Mellinger (*)
Southern Illinois University School of Medicine, Department of
Surgery, Springfield, IL, USA
e-mail: ppoola@siumed.edu; areid@siumed.edu;
jmellinger@siumed.edu

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature      813
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_42
814   V. P. Poola et al.

and depersonalization components in particular are fostering
substance abuse [4], broken relationships, depression [5], and
suicide [6] at a personal level and correlate with increasing
medical errors [3], decreasing quality of care and patient sat-
isfaction [7], and decreasing clinical and scholarly productiv-
ity as well [8].
   Surgeons have historically and appropriately taken pride
in their noble and privileged vocation and have labored to
improve the quality of surgical care they deliver.
Simultaneously, the single-minded focus on patient care and
quality of life appears to have fostered an unintended jeop-
ardy for surgeons themselves, related to the physical and
emotional toll of an unrealistic work burden. Current burn-
out prevalence has reached a level that threatens the profes-
sion and the institutions it serves. If the current trajectory
continues, it is apparent there will be significant consequences
in attracting young talent into the discipline [9], as well as in
retaining and effectively utilizing the skills of current surgical
providers to their full career potential.
   In this chapter, we discuss the factors that have contrib-
uted to burnout among surgeons over the years, review tools
for measuring burnout, and outline evidence-based interven-
tions that can help prevent and mitigate its consequences.


Etiology and Risk Factors for Burnout
Understanding the etiology and risk factors that contribute
to surgeons’ fatigue is essential prior to considering interven-
tions that are aimed at prevention and treatment. Burnout is
a global crisis and seems to affect physicians from developed
countries disproportionately in comparison to physicians
from low-income and middle-income countries, partly due to
the unique individual and societal expectations in such set-
tings, coupled with the work environment [10]. The etiology
described in this chapter is mostly pertinent to the developed
world and multifactorial, which is categorized into personal
and workplace or system-related factors.
             Chapter 42.   Fatigue in Surgery: Managing…   815

Personal/Demographic Risk Factors

There are several personal and demographic factors that cor-
relate with susceptibility for burnout. In the study by
Campbell et al., an inverse correlation between age and burn-
out among surgeons was noted, contrary to the authors’
hypothesis that older surgeons would be more likely to expe-
rience burnout as a function of the longer periods of expo-
sure to instigating pressures and factors in comparison to
younger colleagues [11]. In the same study, they also found a
strong association between burnout and a desire to retire
among young surgeons. In a study on gender variations in
work-life balance and burnout by Dyrbye et al., it was noted
that even though the factors contributing to burnout were
remarkably similar for female and male surgeons, women
were more likely to experience work-home conflict than men,
which correlated with higher levels of burnout among women
surgeons [12]. Lindeman et al. studied the emotional intelli-
gence and personality features of surgery residents and their
association with burnout [13]. In that study, while burnout
was generally noted to be high among surgery residents, resi-
dents with high emotional intelligence and positive work
experiences were noted to be of lower risk.


Workplace-/System-Related Factors

There are a number of well-intended system developments
that have taken place in the last several decades which have
significantly impacted healthcare training and delivery. All of
these changes were deemed necessary and well thought out
at the time they were instituted, and many of them continue
to serve the purpose for which they were intended to the
present day. However, if one considers the collective or holis-
tic impact, these adjustments have had the unintended or
unconsidered consequence of imposing an unrealistic burden
of change and added work on surgical providers in a short
and compressed amount of time. We describe some of these
816   V. P. Poola et al.

significant changes which have contributed to “job creep”
and workflow pressure in what follows.
1. The Quality Movement
      Quality improvement in healthcare is not a new concept;
   however, public reporting of quality and tying it to the pay-
   ment structure is a novel and recent trend [14]. The Institute
   of Medicine (IOM) report “To Err is Human” was published
   in 1999 and served to energize the public conversation on
   the quality of healthcare and ways and means to improve it
   [15]. Since then, several national organizations, both public
   and private, along with surgical societies, have implemented
   well-designed quality improvement processes. As a result,
   the quality of care delivered to patients has significantly
   improved across many aspects of medicine. In the process, a
   number of regulatory, reporting, and compliance mecha-
   nisms were put in place to facilitate measurement and moni-
   toring of quality, including patient satisfaction scores and
   cost accounting measures, among others.
2. Electronic Medical Records (EMRs)
      Transition to EMRs was inevitable, given challenges
   posed by the ever-increasing complexities in medical care
   in the present information age, so as to improve the porta-
   bility, transparency, quality [16], and value of medical
   records. The Health Information Technology for Economic
   and Clinical Health (HITECH) Act authorized incentive
   payments through Medicare and Medicaid to clinicians
   and hospitals to promote EMR adoption and implementa-
   tion, and they became ubiquitous.
      Since the current-generation EMR is billing and quality
   metric capture-driven, it engenders a culture oriented to
   checking boxes, cut-and-paste formatting, and information
   bloating of records with unnecessary information; the
   related time expenditure involves “desktop medicine”
   rather than patient contact for physicians. In the place of
   bedside care and compassion, we have gradually moved in
   the direction of efficiency and metric documentation,
   entailing in the eyes of many providers an inherent com-
   promise of priorities in the patient-doctor relationship [17].
             Chapter 42.   Fatigue in Surgery: Managing…    817

   More thoughts about EMRs and how they contribute to
   burnout are elucidated in Chap. 38.
3. Ergonomics in the Operating Room
      With the advent of minimally invasive surgery, the man-­
   machine interface became increasingly common and
   important in the operating room. In the initial phase of
   widespread adoption of laparoscopy, the equipment and
   training of laparoscopic surgeons did not incorporate prin-
   ciples of ergonomic science including equipment design,
   workplace environment layout, operating team, as well as
   patient safety and environment-related productivity. This
   neglect resulted in prolonged operations and significant
   physical strain for surgeons [18]. The recent trend toward
   increasing use of robotic surgery with improved ergonomic
   design, including attention to the machine interface with
   both patient and provider, may help in addressing this
   challenge [19]. More thoughts about ergonomics and injury
   prevention to maintain surgical wellness are discussed in
   detail in Chap. 45.
4. Information Overload
      In the present information age, it only takes about
   18 months to double medical knowledge, as opposed to
   100 years prior to World War I. As we rapidly accumulate
   and adapt knowledge for the betterment of humankind, it
   is easy to underestimate the cognitive pressures entailed,
   which can lead to feelings of inadequacy on the part of pro-
   viders. Surgical societies and specialty boards employ con-
   tinuing medical education (CME) programs to help assure
   their membership and the public that they are up-to-date
   in their knowledge. Documentation of engagement with
   such programs are among the requirements for continued
   certification, which 81% of physicians believed was a bur-
   den as reflected in a nationwide cross-specialty survey [20].
   The growing necessity of multispecialty algorithms of care,
   incorporating innovations in genetics, pharmacotherapy,
   and both diagnostic and therapeutic technology, has added
   to the challenges of contemporary delivery of optimal
   patient care.
818   V. P. Poola et al.

5. Changes in Surgical Education
      The duty hour restrictions and supervision requirements
   for trainees instituted by the Accreditation Council of
   Graduate Medical Education (ACGME) have represented
   a significant and positive development for the learning
   environment; however, they have entailed a “senioriza-
   tion” of clinical work, with resulting heightened pressure
   on faculty and post-training care providers [21]. These
   changes, again promoted by a safety-oriented culture, have
   gradually pushed responsibility for the care of patients
   toward those with higher levels of experience and contrib-
   uted to diminished levels of autonomy and concerns
   regarding adequacy of training both in the operating room
   and beyond for surgery residents. This is now a major con-
   cern, as graduating surgery residents felt not well prepared
   for either fellowship training or independent practice [22].
6. Moral Insult
      Moral insult in medicine is described as “the challenge
   of simultaneously knowing what care patients need but
   being unable to provide it due to constraints that are
   beyond our control.” Experiences of such moral insults are
   far too common and start unfortunately in a medical stu-
   dent [23]. Surgeons may be particularly prone to such chal-
   lenges, as complications and the technical and resource
   challenges entailed in their management are unavoidable
   in one’s career [24]. In a guest editorial by Dean et al., they
   propose a change of nomenclature from “burnout” to
   “moral insult,” as the former suggests the problem resides
   within the individual, disregarding the presence of circum-
   stances beyond his or her control [25]. In the same article,
   they suggested inviting administrators to join in clinical
   rounds, making physician satisfaction a financial priority,
   and establishing a sense of community among clinicians,
   among other interventions, as a part of a strategy to pre-
   vent or share the burden of moral insult. This is also elabo-
   rated on further in Chap. 38.
             Chapter 42.   Fatigue in Surgery: Managing…    819

7. Medicolegal Issues
      Malpractice risk is inherent for surgeons [26], and mal-
   practice stress syndrome has significant psychological and
   physical effects on physicians that include isolation, nega-
   tive self-image, and feelings of hopelessness and depres-
   sion [27]. The risk of malpractice continues to rise as
   healthcare becomes more and more complex. The practice
   of defensive medicine is more prevalent in specialties at
   high risk for malpractice, including emergency medicine,
   general surgery, orthopedic surgery, neurosurgery, obstet-
   rics and gynecology, and radiology. Interestingly, rates of
   burnout seem to correlate with the same specialties in
   which the risk of malpractice litigation is high [28].
8. Economics
      The average medical student debt in 2011 was $170,000,
   and it increased to $190,000 by 2017 in the United States
   [29]. It is projected that if this trend continues, about 50%
   of physician salary will be consumed by monthly repay-
   ments of student loans in the years to come [30]. Student
   loan debt has significant influence on surgery resident
   career and lifestyle decision-making [31]. During the time
   the student loan debt has continued to increase, physician
   payments and salaries have gradually declined. Most phy-
   sicians and surgeons over the past two to three decades
   have become employees of larger healthcare systems
   rather than independent practitioners, with an attendant
   decrease in autonomy in decision-making and other
   aspects of patient care.


Measuring Burnout/Fatigue
It is important to understand how the profession can mean-
ingfully assess and measure burnout before considering the
potential means of intervention. Both quantitative and quali-
tative elements are important in this discussion. There are
many assessment tools available for this purpose, and a few of
those commonly used are outlined in Table 42.1. Among
820   V. P. Poola et al.

Table 42.1 Common burnout measurement tools
Name of the inventory Description                               Cost
Maslach Burnout        22 items and 3 subscales:                Yes
Inventory-Health       1. Emotional exhaustion
Services Survey (MBI-­ 2. Depersonalization
HSS)                   3. Diminished personal
                       accomplishment
Single-item measures       Consists of only two questions of    Free
of emotional               the full 22-item MBI-HSS:
exhaustion and              1. I feel burned out from my
depersonalization             work
                            2. I have become more callous
                              toward people since I took this
                              job
Copenhagen Burnout         Consists of 19 items in 3 sub-­      Free
Inventory (CBI)            dimensions: personal burnout,
                           work-related burnout, and client-­
                           related burnout
Utrecht Work               Consisting of 17 items. “Work        Free
Engagement Scale           engagement” is considered to
(UWES)                     be the antipole of burnout. This
                           scale measures work engagement
                           and arises from the research in
                           positive psychology
Jefferson Scale of         Consists of 20 items and             Yes
Empathy-Health             measures empathy in healthcare
Professions (JSE-HP)       providers and students


them, the Maslach Burnout Inventory-Health Sciences
Survey (MBI-HSS) is the most reliable, validated, and com-
monly used for both clinical and research purposes [32, 33].
Even though MBI-HSS is considered the gold standard test
for measure burnout, it is not without limitations. These
would include its cost and lack of query in regard to nonpro-
fessional confounders such as child care demands, the sched-
ule and support of a spouse or partner, other significant life
events, and financial concerns [34]. To mitigate the cost of
MBI-HSS, West et al. proposed a single-item measure of both
             Chapter 42.   Fatigue in Surgery: Managing…   821

emotional exhaustion and depersonalization, which has been
shown to provide meaningful information on burnout among
medical professionals [35]. Tools that measure depression and
anxiety distinct from burnout can and should also be consid-
ered in select situations in which burnout is highly prevalent.
By measuring and monitoring burnout, organizations can
demonstrate care for the well-being of their employees,
which is a critical systemic first step toward providing a
solution.


 trategies to Address and Prevent
S
Burnout/Fatigue
Once burnout is identified, measured, and studied, it is pos-
sible to recognize and categorize the realities of unrealistic
and unsustainable work burden at both the individual and
institutional levels. Even though most of the factors that have
contributed to “job creep” for surgeons will stay, there are
strategies that can be employed to minimize the burden aris-
ing from contemporary pressures, while professionals and
institutions continue to adapt. Most mitigation interventions
are aimed at preventing the negative aspects of burnout
(emotional exhaustion and depersonalization). While this is
not inappropriate, a special emphasis should be given to strat-
egies that enhance the sense of personal accomplishment,
alongside efforts mitigating the negative domains, in order to
achieve an overall sense of well-being. These strategies can be
generalized or tailored to the etiology or to the circumstances
once the source of burnout is identified and measured
through a standardized tool. Interventions may be focused on
the individual, on structural or organizational solutions, or
ideally and optimally on both. The literature indicates that
both individual and system-based interventions will result in
meaningful reduction in physician burnout, if selected and
executed appropriately. A systematic review and meta-­
analysis of available studies on intervention to prevent physi-
cian burnout showed a reduction in overall burnout rates
822   V. P. Poola et al.

from 54% to 44%, with improvement of both emotional
exhaustion and depersonalization scores [36].
   Improving a sense of personal accomplishment or job sat-
isfaction is again as important as mitigating emotional
exhaustion and depersonalization. Strategies to improve the
sense of personal accomplishment are often rooted in the
principles of positive psychology and personal well-being and
include strategies promoting alignment of intrinsic and
extrinsic motivation factors to primary work outcomes.
   Several strategies or solutions will be provided in what fol-
lows, which have been proven useful in mitigating the nega-
tive elements of burnout, as well as in improving a sense of
personal accomplishment. Some of these strategies can be
executed at an individual level and also reinforced and sup-
ported at the institutional level. It is often both the commit-
ment from the individual physician or employee, coupled
with organizational changes that foster the culture of well-­
being by providing adequate resources, which can drive sus-
tainable and desirable outcomes.
1. Self-care/Interventions at the Individual Level
      Self-care strategies are at the center of all the measures
   that aim to prevent burnout and promote well-being. These
   include concepts such as self-calibration, stress manage-
   ment, mindfulness, meditation, exercise/fitness programs,
   sleep management, dietary recommendations, personal
   finance, access to relationship assessment and counseling
   services, and various approaches to work life integration.
      In a prior study, brief self-care workshops of 2-month
   duration were offered to physicians, which resulted in an
   improvement in depersonalization; however the overall
   level of burnout remained the same [37]. Physical activity
   has been shown to improve both physical and mental
   health; hence the Center for Disease Control and
   Prevention recommends regular physical activity for all
   Americans [38]. Physicians, especially during their training
   period, tend to be more sedentary, and team-based, institu-
   tionally incentivized exercise programs are one way to
   improve physical activity and quality of life [39].
             Chapter 42.   Fatigue in Surgery: Managing…      823

       A mental skills curriculum implemented for novice
   learners in surgical training has been shown to reduce
   stress and enhance performance [40]. Mindfulness-based
   approaches address work-related stress by teaching the
   quality of awareness skill, including the ability to pay atten-
   tion in a particular way: on purpose or intentional, in the
   present moment, and nonjudgmental [41]. Krasner et al.
   offered a CME course on mindfulness as an intervention
   to physicians which included didactics, formal mindfulness
   meditation, and narrative and appreciative inquiry exer-
   cises followed by discussions. In that study, they demon-
   strated the participants had improved personal well-being,
   decreased burnout, improved mood (including overall,
   depression, vigor, tension, anger, and fatigue elements),
   and also experienced positive changes in empathy and psy-
   chosocial beliefs [42].
       Targeted communications skills training, especially
   where moral insults are likely, such as when dealing with
   difficult end of life situations and oncology care, has been
   shown to improve physician confidence and reduce
   ­subsequent burnout [43, 44]. A simple intervention such as
    organizing a “debriefing” meeting, where participants meet
    their peers, share their experiences, and support each other
    to create a sense of community and belonging, can be very
    valuable in reducing stress and burnout [45].
2. Institutional/Organizational Interventions
       Institutional/organizational support is extremely
    important for a sustainable change in culture to be
    achieved, oriented enduringly to workforce well-being.
    This means providing adequate resources where neces-
    sary and at times making required changes in policies and
    guidelines geared toward balancing productivity and pro-
    vider well-being. Self-care alone is often not sustainable
    without support from leadership and complementary
    organizational structure. Besides providing resources and
    support for self-care, evidence-based organizational
    interventions are categorized or centered around the
    themes which follow.
824   V. P. Poola et al.

  (a) Balancing Productivity vs. Well-Being
          As outlined in the section on the etiology of burn-
      out, physician or surgeon productivity and the related
      economics for healthcare organizations can promote
      unhealthy competition at both individual and organi-
      zational levels. Highlighting physician well-being as a
      quality metric at the institutional level, alongside
      patient-related quality indicators, may help create
      awareness and vet provider well-being as an indicator
      or quality of care as well as an organizational value.
      Such approaches also have the potential to impact
      institutional financial performance favorably by
      enhancing physician recruitment and retention. Given
      the economic reality where return on investment
      (ROI) drives organizational change and policy, a case
      for investment in surgeons’ well-being has according
      fiscal merit and hence can be leveraged at the institu-
      tional and organizational level [46]. Increasing the pro-
      ductivity and income equation for surgeons has been
      shown to be associated with a degree of increased
      career satisfaction, as most surgeons at present
      ­graduate from training with significant financial debt
       [47]. For academic surgeons in particular with signifi-
       cant non-revenue-generating job expectations includ-
       ing teaching, administration, and scholarship, having
       “clinical academic service contracts” has been shown
       to increase satisfaction with professional activities and
       should be considered in situations where it is feasible
       [48].
  (b) Providing Structured Mentorship/Coaching
          Providing structured mentorship from a senior fac-
       ulty member or through a designated program imple-
       mented at an institutional level has been shown to
       mitigate fatigue by improving the sense of boundary
       setting as well as prioritization, self-compassion, self-­
       care, and self-awareness [49]. Role modeling by a
       senior faculty member, division chair, or department
       chair, alongside mentoring and coaching activities, can
          Chapter 42.   Fatigue in Surgery: Managing…     825

    be very impactful at both professional and personal
    levels. Many institutions at present have a “Chief
    Wellness Officer” (CWO), who is primarily focused on
    improving their organizations’ work environment and
    culture, complementing individual-level interventions
    [50]. CWOs can impact the organizational culture
    through helping to promote a positive work and learn-
    ing environment and by guiding the organization in
    reducing administrative burden and aligning both
    workforce and leadership in achieving a sustainable
    balance of productivity and well-being.
(c) Autonomy
        Autonomy at clinical work has been shown to
    directly correlate with surgeons’ work satisfaction at
    the individual level [51]. That being noted, it remains
    controversial as to whether increasing departmental
    autonomy in the choice of quality and productivity
    metrics facilitates a higher quality of care, or otherwise
    [52]. Career satisfaction is highly dependent on work-­
    life balance, and control over schedule and work hours
    is an important aspect thereof [53]. Creating an
    ­opportunity for autonomy and flexibility as surgeons
     create their own work schedule should be considered
     in policy changes and may be particularly important in
     allowing for major life events such as having children
     and parenting. Fostering or adapting to the “servant
     leadership model” as proposed by Greenleaf in 1970
     might be one effective strategy in bridging the gap
     between the physicians and other frontline providers
     and institutional leadership through deliberate and
     cultivated listening.
(d) Motivation
        Self-determination theory is a broad framework for
     understanding psychological well-being in the context
     of both intrinsic and extrinsic motivation [54]. While
     the meaning of work, autonomy, and mastery still
     remains deep rooted and intrinsic motivations for
     most surgeons, extrinsic motivation factors and
826   V. P. Poola et al.

      rewards such as compensation and other recognitions
      for productivity are highly tangible and are often per-
      ceived as being crucial to the alignment of individual
      and organizational goals and priorities. Khullar et al.
      demonstrated that institutional payment models with
      higher reimbursement tied to performance, rather
      than productivity per se, may empower physicians to
      be not just aligned agents, but change agents [55].
      Where the productivity model is well-suited and/or
      difficult to change, changing or augmenting the reward
      structure by including non-monetary currencies such
      as more scheduling flexibility, or more time to pursue
      activities such as teaching, research, and other mission-­
      oriented work, can enable physicians to accomplish
      both professional and personal fulfillment as distinct
      from a raise in pay [56, 57].
  (e) Positive Psychology
         One of the criticisms of the present evidence as well
      as interventions on burnout is that it is aimed heavily
      toward reducing and mitigating on the negative side of
      the equation and achieving absence of burnout rather
      than pursuing a positive sense of well-being [34].
      Although mitigating the negative effects of burnout or
      fatigue is extremely important, certainly a comple-
      mentary and likely even more important concept
      would be applying principles such as those of positive
      psychology. This emphasizes strength, happiness,
      growth, and resilience and which in turn focuses on the
      ability to thrive rather than just cope and survive. If we
      could better understand when and how to apply the
      principles of positive psychology, many of which are
      ancient and well-attested in spiritual and other tradi-
      tions, redirecting some of our research and scientific
      efforts on the theme of well-being and fulfillment in
      the context of surgeons’ lives, we might save a signifi-
      cant amount of stress or fatigue to ourselves going for-
      ward. Indeed, focusing only on resilience strategies
      and amelioration of the negatively framed side of the
             Chapter 42.   Fatigue in Surgery: Managing…       827

       burnout equation tends to promote a survival and vic-
       tim orientation that limits generative and aspirational
       thinking critical to creative problem-solving.
       Institutional resources and efforts should be gradually
       redirected or shifted toward improving the well-being
       of their workforce as a means to not only achieve a
       lower prevalence of burnout but also to improve work
       satisfaction.
   (f) Human and Organization Potential
          Leveraging and enhancing human and organiza-
       tional potential by deliberate efforts that are executed
       at the institutional level so as to mitigate burnout and
       enhance the well-being of physicians can make a sig-
       nificant difference [58]. The Center for Human and
       Organizational Potential (cHOP) at Southern Illinois
       University School of Medicine (Editors’ note: this is
       the authors’ home institution) is a current example of
       an entity created to do just that, providing faculty, staff,
       and learners with the tools to achieve professional
       growth and satisfaction by offering resources in
       ­professional development, leadership and excellence,
        and wellness [59].


Conclusion
Fatigue/burnout is a well-recognized occupational hazard,
which has the potential to affect all healthcare personnel
including surgeons. The etiology of burnout is multifactorial,
an unintentional consequence of a constellation of well-­
intended measures. Measuring burnout and devoting effort to
identifying the source at both the individual and institutional
level are important. There are several evidence-based reme-
dies that can be tailored to prevent or mitigate the negative
effects of burnout. Efforts that improve a positive sense of
well-being are equally important, if not more important, to
creating and sustaining a joyful workforce.
828       V. P. Poola et al.

References
 1. Freudenberger HJ. Staff burn-out. J Soc Issues. 1974;30(1):159–65.
 2. Shanafelt TD, et al. Burnout among physicians compared with
    individuals with a professional or doctoral degree in a field out-
    side of medicine. Mayo Clin Proc. 2019;94(3):549–51.. Elsevier.
 3. Shanafelt TD, et al. Burnout and medical errors among American
    surgeons. Ann Surg. 2010;251(6):995–1000.
 4. Oreskovich MR, et al. Prevalence of alcohol use disorders
    among American surgeons. Arch Surg. 2012;147(2):168–74.
 5. Bianchi R, Schonfeld IS, Laurent E. Burnout–depression over-
    lap: a review. Clin Psychol Rev. 2015;36:28–41.
 6. Shanafelt TD, et al. Special report: suicidal ideation among
    American surgeons. Arch Surg. 2011;146(1):54–62.
 7. Anagnostopoulos F, et al. Physician burnout and patient satisfac-
    tion with consultation in primary health care settings: evidence
    of relationships from a one-with-many design. J Clin Psychol
    Med Settings. 2012;19(4):401–10.
 8. Turner TB, et al. The impact of physician burnout on clinical
    and academic productivity of gynecologic oncologists: a decision
    analysis. Gynecol Oncol. 2017;146(3):642–6.
 9. Are C, et al. A multinational perspective on “lifestyle” and other
    perceptions of contemporary medical students about general
    surgery. Ann Surg. 2012;256(2):378–86.
10. h t t p s : / / w w w. t h e l a n c e t . c o m / j o u r n a l s / l a n c e t / a r t i c l e /
    PIIS0140-­6736(19)31573-­9/fulltext.
11. Campbell DA Jr, et al. Burnout among American surgeons.
    Surgery. 2001;130(4):696–705.
12. Dyrbye LN, et al. Relationship between work-home conflicts
    and burnout among American surgeons: a comparison by sex.
    Arch Surg. 2011;146(2):211–7.
13. Lindeman B, et al. Association of burnout with emotional intel-
    ligence and personality in surgical residents: can we predict who
    is most at risk? J Surg Educ. 2017;74(6):e22–30.
14. • No Authors Listed. Rule emphasizes quality and cost savings.
    Hosp Case Manag. 2011;19:148–9. Summary of The Centers for
    Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) 2012 final rule on the
    Inpatient Prospective Payment System (IPPS). Rule establishes
    that hospitals will receive a net 1% increase in reimbursement,
    also proposes to add a measure of Medicare spending per bene-
    ficiary to the Hospital Inpatient Quality Reporting program and
                Chapter 42.    Fatigue in Surgery: Managing…        829

      the Value Based Purchasing program in effort to reduce costs by
      rewarding efficient care rather than volume. Finally in an effort
      to reduce preventable healthcare associated infections HAIs, the
      rule introduces new quality measures to be implemented in 2014
      and 2015.
15.   Kohn L, Corrigan J, Donaldson M, editors. To err is human:
      building a safer health system. Washington, DC: National
      Academy Press; 1999.
16.   Bates DW, et al. Effect of computerized physician order entry
      and a team intervention on prevention of serious medication
      errors. JAMA. 1998;280(15):1311–6.
17.   Zulman DM, Shah NH, Verghese A. Evolutionary pressures
      on the electronic health record: caring for complexity. JAMA.
      2016;316(9):923–4.
18.   Berguer R, Forkey DL, Smith WD. The effect of laparoscopic
      instrument working angle on surgeons’ upper extremity work-
      load. Surg Endosc. 2001;15(9):1027–9.
19.   van der Schatte Olivier RH, et al. Ergonomics, user comfort,
      and performance in standard and robot-assisted laparoscopic
      surgery. Surg Endosc. 2009;23(6):1365.
20.   Cook DA, et al. Physician attitudes about maintenance of cer-
      tification: a cross-specialty national survey. Mayo Clin Proc.
      2016;91(10):1336–45. Elsevier.
21.   Dacey RG, Nasca TJ. Seniorization of tasks in the aca-
      demic medical center: a worrisome trend. J Am Coll Surg.
      2019;228(3):299–302.
22.   Mattar SG, et al. General surgery residency inadequately pre-
      pares trainees for fellowship: results of a survey of fellowship
      program directors. Ann Surg. 2013;258(3):440–9.
23.   Wiggleton C, et al. Medical students’ experiences of moral
      distress: development of a web-based survey. Acad Med.
      2010;85(1):111–7.
24.   Munch S, de Kryger L. Moral wounds: complicated complica-
      tions. JAMA. 2001;285(9):1131–2.
25.   Dean W, Dean A, Talbot S. Reframing clinician distress: moral
      injury not burnout. Fed Pract. 2019;36(9):400.
26.   Jena AB, et al. Malpractice risk according to physician specialty.
      N Engl J Med. 2011;365(7):629–36.
27.   Maroon JC. Catastrophic cardiovascular complications
      from medical malpractice stress syndrome. J Neurosurg.
      2019;130(6):2081–5.
830    V. P. Poola et al.

28. Martini S, et al. Burnout comparison among residents in differ-
    ent medical specialties. Acad Psychiatry. 2004;28(3):240–2.
29. PAYE, IBR. Medical student education: debt, costs, and loan
    repayment fact card. 2013.
30. Youngclaus J, Fresne JA. Physician education debt and the cost
    to attend medical school: 2012 update. Association of American
    Medical Colleges; 2013.
31. Gray K, et al. Influence of student loan debt on general surgery
    resident career and lifestyle decision-making. J Am Coll Surg.
    2020;230(2):173–81.
32. Maslach C, et al. Maslach burnout inventory, vol. 21. Palo Alto:
    Consulting Psychologists Press; 1986.
33. Maslach C, Jackson SE. The measurement of experienced burn-
    out. J Organ Behav. 1981;2(2):99–113.
34. Eckleberry-Hunt J, Kirkpatrick H, Barbera T. The problems with
    burnout research. Acad Med. 2018;93(3):367–70.
35. West CP, et al. Single item measures of emotional exhaustion and
    depersonalization are useful for assessing burnout in medical
    professionals. J Gen Intern Med. 2009;24(12):1318.
36. West CP, et al. Interventions to prevent and reduce physi-
    cian burnout: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet.
    2016;388(10057):2272–81.
37. Martins AE, et al. Impact of a brief intervention on the burnout
    levels of pediatric residents. J Pediatr. 2011;87(6):493–8.
38. https://health.gov/sites/default/files/2019-­09/Physical_Activity_
    Guidelines_2nd_edition.pdf.
39. Weight CJ, et al. Physical activity, quality of life, and burnout
    among physician trainees: the effect of a team-based, incentiv-
    ized exercise program. Mayo Clin Proc. 2013;88(12):1435–42.
    Elsevier.
40. Anton NE, et al. Effectiveness of a mental skills curriculum to
    reduce novices’ stress. J Surg Res. 2016;206(1):199–205.
41. Kabat-Zinn J. Wherever you go, there you are: mindfulness
    meditation in everyday life. Hachette Books; New York, 2009.
42. Krasner MS, et al. Association of an educational program in
    mindful communication with burnout, empathy, and attitudes
    among primary care physicians. JAMA. 2009;302(12):1284–93.
43. Clayton JM, et al. Evaluation of a novel individualised
    communication-­skills training intervention to improve doctors’
    confidence and skills in end-of-life communication. Palliat Med.
    2013;27(3):236–43.
              Chapter 42.    Fatigue in Surgery: Managing…         831

44. Bragard I, et al. Insight on variables leading to burnout in cancer
    physicians. J Cancer Educ. 2010;25(1):109–15.
45. Gunasingam N, et al. Reducing stress and burnout in junior
    doctors: the impact of debriefing sessions. Postgrad Med J.
    2015;91(1074):182–7.
46. Shanafelt T, Goh J, Sinsky C. The business case for investing in
    physician well-being. JAMA Intern Med. 2017;177(12):1826–32.
47. Leigh JP, et al. Physician career satisfaction across specialties.
    Arch Intern Med. 2002;162(14):1577–84.
48. Clifton J, et al. The effect of clinical academic service contracts
    on surgeon satisfaction. Can J Surg. 2007;50(3):175.
49. Schneider S, Kingsolver K, Rosdahl J. Physician coaching to
    enhance well-being: a qualitative analysis of a pilot intervention.
    Explore (NY). 2014;10(6):372–9.
50. Ripp J, Shanafelt T. The health care chief wellness officer: what
    the role is and is not. Acad Med. 2020;95(9):1354–8.
51. Raptis DA, et al. Job satisfaction among young board-certified
    surgeons at academic centers in Europe and North America.
    Ann Surg. 2012;256(5):796–805.
52. Larsen KN, Kristensen SR, Søgaard R. Autonomy to health care
    professionals as a vehicle for value-based health care? Results
    of a quasi-experiment in hospital governance. Soc Sci Med.
    2018;196:37–46.
53. Keeton K, et al. Predictors of physician career satisfaction, work–
    life balance, and burnout. Obstet Gynecol. 2007;109(4):949–55.
54. Ryan RM, Deci EL. Self-determination theory: basic psycho-
    logical needs in motivation, development, and wellness. Guilford
    Publications; New York, 2017.
55. Khullar D, et al. How 10 leading health systems pay their doctors.
    Healthc (Amst). 2015;3(2):60–2. Elsevier.
56. Berwick DM. The toxicity of pay for performance. Qual Manag
    Health Care. 1995;4:27–33.
57. Shanafelt TD, et al. Career fit and burnout among academic
    faculty. Arch Intern Med. 2009;169(10):990–5.
58. Shanafelt TD, et al. Changes in burnout and satisfaction with
    work-life balance in physicians and the general US work-
    ing population between 2011 and 2014. Mayo Clin Proc.
    2015;90(12):1600–13. Elsevier.
59. https://www.siumed.edu/chop/chop.html.
Chapter 43
Training New Surgeons:
Maintaining Quality
in the Era of Work Hour
Regulations
Ingrid S. Schmiederer and James R. Korndorffer Jr


Quality training requires efficient, guided learning for train-
ees that includes required operative time, appropriate
­evaluations, and reliable testing. In the current climate of
 surgical training, there are many factors that impact this qual-
 ity of training. These factors include safety initiatives, new
 systems of documentation, higher case complexities with new
 techniques, and duty-hour restrictions. One might argue that
 these factors, especially work hour regulations, could be
 obstacles to quality; however, review of operative experience
 and resident wellness within duty-hour regulations shows
 that the perceived obstacles may actually be opportunities to
 improve mentorship and entrustment of residents.



I. S. Schmiederer ∙ J. R. Korndorffer Jr (*)
Department of Surgery, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, CA, USA
e-mail: ischmied@stanford.edu; korndorffer@stanford.edu




© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature   833
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_43
834   I. S. Schmiederer and J. R. Korndorffer Jr

   Restrictions to limit the time residents spend on hospital-­
related activities were implemented in 2003, when the
Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education
(ACGME) set mandatory limitations on resident work hours
to mitigate the potential effect of resident fatigue on patient
safety. These rules limited residents to working 80 h per week
in the hospital with strict guidelines for on-call schedules and
rest periods in between shifts. In 2011, the ACGME further
restricted maximum shift lengths for interns and increased
the rest time after overnight on-call shifts for residents, and
this was ultimately adjusted a third time for more leeway. The
current iterations of duty hours have been studied in multiple
contexts over the last 10+ years. Through systematic investi-
gations of the resident workplace and work time, stakehold-
ers have agreed that regulations are important, but wide
variability has been evident in the benefits of duty-hour
restrictions within the contexts of patient safety, resident edu-
cation/experience, or resident wellness. For instance, most
studies have shown no significant difference in patient health
outcomes. One of the most widely cited studies, Bilmoria’s
Flexibility in Duty Hour Requirements for Surgical Trainees
(FIRST) Trial during the 2014–2015 academic year, showed
no significant differences or negative effects in patient out-
comes when there were less restrictions to duty hours [1].
   Operative volume is needed for the quality development
of a surgical training graduate, but the change in volume can-
not be directly attributed to restricted resident time. In 2010,
Fairfax et al. noted a marked decrease in cases in the era of
work duty restrictions after review of ACGME case log data
from 1999 to 2008. According to comparison of “pre” duty
hours and “post” duty hours, notable declines occurred in
endoscopy (91 ± 3 vs 82 ± 2, P < 0.001) and vascular surgery
(164 ± 29 vs 126 ± 5, P < 0.01) [2]. With broadening focus on
increasingly diverse general surgical approaches at the same
time that hours are restricted, sub-specialty cases could
understandably fall out of focus, especially when vascular
surgery has concomitantly developed integrated residency
programs and endoscopy typically overlaps with gastroenter-
      Chapter 43.   Training New Surgeons: Maintaining…       835

ology trainees. This broadened focus on general surgery
might also be predictable as the development and refinement
of laparoscopic and robotic surgery techniques has expanded
the scope of general surgical training. Further analysis of
physical case load and operative experience for residents
through operative logs and data reviews confirms that there
is increased focus on general surgery procedures and
decreased experience of subspecialty domains in the last
10–20 years of general surgery residency training [3].
    When looking strictly at the amount of time in the physical
learning environment (the hospital), the work hour restric-
tions still allow for proficiency and expertise – traits needed
for quality outcomes – to develop. According to Anders
Ericsson, psychologist and expert in the practice of learning,
so-called expertise requires at least 10,000 h of deliberate
practice [4]. A surgery resident might be able to achieve this
in the 19,200–20,000 h of a duty-hour restricted surgical resi-
dency (80 h per week, 48 weeks, 5–7 years). With this argu-
ment, the approach to quality surgical training might be
better suited when time-based training is de-emphasized.
Competency-based education is structured on learner-­
centered environment and ability, as well as patient need [5].
    Therefore, while the change in hours may not have shown
an effect on patient outcomes, the improvement of the learn-
ing environment within the duty hours may ultimately lead to
enhanced quality of training and graduate skill. In addition to
patient care outcomes, the FIRST Trial looked at resident
perceptions of their own training and education within
­duty-­hour restrictions. There were no significant differences
 in overall resident satisfaction with education, between strict
 duty hours and flexible resident duty hours in cluster-­
 randomized programs, but results did suggest that residents
 found some improvements in certain aspects of resident edu-
 cation (e.g., ability to stay for a late operative case) with flex-
 ible duty-hour policies. There was also the acknowledgment
 that flexible policies seem to affect time for personal activities
 and certain aspects of well-being outside of work [1]. The
 effect on education, then, may be felt in crucial influencers of
836   I. S. Schmiederer and J. R. Korndorffer Jr

resident learning and wellness – like fatigue and burnout. A
systematic review by Ahmed et al. reported improvement in
resident fatigue and burnout with the implementation of the
80-h workweek in 2003 [6]. Limited fatigue and burnout may
lead to improved overall quality of the educational result, but
to compare resident wellness since 2011 or since 2003 to resi-
dent self-assessment before duty-hour restrictions is inade-
quate and arguably unfair, as close study of the resident
experience before 2003, or even 2011, is lacking.
    There is ultimately not enough evidence to argue that
work hour regulations have directly affected the quality of
resident learning positively or negatively since 2003. The dif-
ferences may lie in residents’ perspectives within duty-hour
training, as several surveys since 2013 indicate that general
surgery residents actually feel prepared and confident enter-
ing practice or fellowship, despite the 2012 concerns expressed
in a national survey of sub-specialty fellowship program
directors about ill-preparedness of residency graduates [7–9].
This disconnect in perceptions – between trainees and train-
ers in resident self-efficacy – adds to the misconceptions
about effects of duty hours on the quality of education of
learners.
    Direct effects of work hour restrictions on education qual-
ity or patient care quality have not been demonstrated
clearly, though indirect effects may exist. A relationship with
faculty, based on familiarity and entrustment, is crucial for
trainee development. In this way, one could argue that work
hour restrictions could hinder the growth of mentorship
­relationships between resident and faculty and, perhaps, this
 is where the quality of education has the most potential to fall
 behind. Torbeck found this concept of mentorship to be
 emphasized in an academic institution where senior residents
 identified faculty who allowed for the most and least inde-
 pendence in their trainees and then identified behaviors or
 teaching techniques of those faculty members in how they
 relate to residents. They found that independence depends on
 a trusting relationship between faculty and trainee that might
 only happen when time is given for trust to mature.
      Chapter 43.   Training New Surgeons: Maintaining…       837

Entrustment and independence of the trainee allow for
improved preoperative preparedness, improved skill based
with modeling and repetition of technique, and more mean-
ingful postoperative debriefing [10].
    To maintain quality education and to prevent the potential
negative effect of duty-hour restrictions, program directors
must be proactive in finding ways to establish meaningful
mentor-mentee relationships between faculty and trainees
within time constraints earlier in training. The first step is the
acknowledgment of the importance of mentorship within the
program. Establishment of a mentorship-focused culture pro-
motes resident integration into the general workplace culture
earlier and leads to collaborations more quickly. This model
may address the perception that graduates are unprepared by
instilling skills, as well as confidence, more effectively and
earlier in residency training. Within training time constraints,
mentors can ensure that mentees achieve academic mile-
stones and demonstrate competencies in a timely fashion.
Faculty can correct a trainee’s course more readily as they are
most familiar with them. A good mentor creates a supportive
environment and enforces confidence through entrustment
and provides essential, regular feedback [11]. This also
requires an effort on the part of the program, and a clear
framework, to enable and enhance the process of feedback
and entrustment between faculty and trainees.
    Entrustable Professional Activities (EPAs) are a potential
way for educational objectives and training outcomes to be
linked to healthcare and patient safety within surgical
­residency. These are objectives that can be assessed but also
 discussed as developmental checkpoints. Instead of using
 nonspecific or reductionist statements such as numbers or
 grades (e.g., A–F, or outstanding to failing), the focus with
 EPAs shifts to statements about required supervision and
 prompts further discussion. Faculty are able to discuss resi-
 dents progress in terms that are generalizable among sur-
 geons (e.g., “Can I leave the room when this resident is
 operating?” or “Can the trainee manage the preop/postop
 patient without proactive assistance?”) [12]. EPAs translate
838   I. S. Schmiederer and J. R. Korndorffer Jr

these general and understandable assessments into levels of
supervision required for the trainee to execute a task:
1. Deficient execution by the trainee, even with direct
   supervision
2. Execution with proactive supervision
3. Execution with supervision as needed/requested
4. Supervision at a distance if at all
5. Supervision provided by the trainee to more junior
   colleagues
   In these clear terms, the goal for the resident is “supervi-
sion at a distance” before independent practice (Level 4 of
the EPA scale) [13]. The activities deemed necessary for inde-
pendent general surgery practice are listed into attainable
and concrete skills within the five different EPAs listed
below, which are still developing and being integrated into
the assessment of general surgery trainees:
1. Evaluation and management of a patient with an inguinal
   hernia.
2. Evaluate and manage a patient with right lower quadrant
   pain.
3. Evaluate and manage a patient with gallbladder disease.
4. Evaluation and initial management of a patient presenting
   with blunt or penetrating trauma.
5. Provide general surgical consultation to other healthcare
   providers.
   Within the confines of duty-hour restrictions and busy
clinical environments, perhaps shifting the focus from hours
to competency-based education, which relies on abilities
rather than time logs, might ensure and enrich quality train-
ing. Both trainees and supervisors may be supported by EPAs
to optimize shared information that is discussed within one-­
on-­one trainee meetings, as well as competency or promotion
committees. For mentors or faculty, the smaller pieces of
information or tangible experiences about a trainee are
collected in understandable and concrete terms to convey
where the trainee stands more clearly, earlier, and more effi-
     Chapter 43.   Training New Surgeons: Maintaining…         839

ciently. Focusing on competency-based, concrete activities
and required levels of supervision can help frame discussion
and feedback while maintaining quality training.


Suggested Reading
1. Bilimoria KY, Chung JW, Hedges LV, et al. National cluster-­
   randomized trial of duty-hour flexibility in surgical training.
   N Engl J Med. 2016;374(8):713–27. https://doi.org/10.1056/
   NEJMoa1515724.
2. Fairfax LM, Christmas AB, Green JM, Miles WS, Sing
   RF. Operative experience in the era of duty hour restrictions: is
   broad-based general surgery training coming to an end? Am Surg.
   2010;76(6):578–82. https://doi.org/10.1177/000313481007600619.
3. Kassam A-F, Lynch CA, Cortez AR, Vaysburg D, Potts JR
   III, Quillin RC III. Where has all the complexity gone? An
   analysis of the modern surgical resident operative experience.
   J Surg Educ. Published online 2020. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
   jsurg.2020.06.016.
4. Hirschl RB. The making of a surgeon: 10,000hours? J
   Pediatr Surg. 2015;50(5):699–706. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
   jpedsurg.2015.02.061.
5. Frank JR, Mungroo R, Ahmad Y, Wang M, DeRossi S, Horsley T,
   Rossi SDE. Toward a definition of competency-based education
   in medicine: a systematic review of published definitions. Med
   Teach. 2010;32(8):631–7.
6. Ahmed N, Devitt KS, Keshet I, et al. A systematic review
   of the effects of resident duty hour restrictions in surgery:
   impact on resident wellness, training, and patient outcomes.
   Ann Surg. 2014;259(6):1041–53. https://doi.org/10.1097/
   SLA.0000000000000595.
7. Rasmussen JM, Najarian MM, Ties JS, Borgert AJ, Kallies
   KJ, Jarman BT. Career satisfaction, gender bias, and work-­
   life balance: a contemporary assessment of general surgeons.
   J Surg Educ. Published online 2020. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
   jsurg.2020.06.012.
8. Friedell ML, VanderMeer TJ, Cheatham ML, et al. Perceptions of
   graduating general surgery chief residents: are they confident in
   their training? J Am Coll Surg. 2014;218(4):695–703. https://doi.
   org/10.1016/j.jamcollsurg.2013.12.022.
840    I. S. Schmiederer and J. R. Korndorffer Jr

 9. Mattar SG, Alseidi AA, Jones DB, et al. General surgery residency
    inadequately prepares trainees for fellowship: results of a survey
    of fellowship program directors. Ann Surg. 2013;258(3):440–9.
    https://doi.org/10.1097/SLA.0b013e3182a191ca.
10. Torbeck L, Wilson A, Choi J, Dunnington GL. Identification of
    behaviors and techniques for promoting autonomy in the operat-
    ing room. Surgery. 2015;158(4):1102–12. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
    surg.2015.05.030.
11. Sanfey H, Hollands C, Gantt NL. Strategies for building an
    effective mentoring relationship. Am J Surg. 2013;206(5):714–8.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amjsurg.2013.08.001.
12. Wagner JP, Lewis CE, Tillou A, et al. Use of entrustable profes-
    sional activities in the assessment of surgical resident compe-
    tency. JAMA Surg. 2018;153(4):335–43. https://doi.org/10.1001/
    jamasurg.2017.4547.
13. Brasel KJ, Klingensmith ME, Englander R, et al. Entrustable
    professional activities in general surgery: development and
    implementation. J Surg Educ. 2019;76(5):1174–86. https://doi.
    org/10.1016/j.jsurg.2019.04.003.
14. Sandhu G, Magas CP, Robinson AB, Scally CP, Minter
    RM. Progressive entrustment to achieve resident autonomy in
    the operating room: a national qualitative study with general
    surgery faculty and residents. Ann Surg. 2017;265(6):1134–40.
    https://doi.org/10.1097/SLA.0000000000001782.
15. Ulmer C, Wolman DM, Johns MME. Resident duty hours:
    enhancing sleep, supervision, and safety. National Academies
    Press; 2009. https://search-­ebscohost-­com.laneproxy.stanford.
    edu/login.aspx?direct=true&db=nlebk&AN=280408&site=eh
    ost-­live. Accessed 9 Sept 2020.
Chapter 44
Maintaining Surgical
Quality in the Setting
of a Crisis
John R. Romanelli


With the recent COVID-19 pandemic, it is certainly reason-
able to reflect upon the maintenance of surgical quality in the
setting of a crisis situation. Given what has transpired – and
in fact is still ongoing at the time of this writing – there are
certainly lessons that are applicable to future events that can
be learned from how we treated surgical patients during the
crisis situation. This chapter will delve into the following top-
ics: hospital resources and the impact on surgical scheduling;
cessation of elective surgery and ramifications for patient
care; scarce resource allocation during the crisis; r­ edeployment
of surgical workforce during a crisis; delays in care delivery of
routine problems due to the crisis; and the re-­emergence back
into elective surgical care following a crisis. The challenges in
maintaining surgical quality during this crisis are illustrated,
while the solutions highlight principles that are foundational
in quality systems.




J. R. Romanelli (*)
Department of Surgery, University of Massachusetts Chan Medical
School - Baystate Medical Center, Springfield, MA, USA
e-mail: John.Romanelli@baystatehealth.org

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature   841
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_44
842   J. R. Romanelli

Hospital Resources During Crisis Situations
Most hospitals have an administrative structure that springs
into action once a crisis situation unfolds. While the pandemic
is fresh on our minds, this could also result from other crisis
states such as a bed crunch caused by influenza; other infec-
tious agents, much like the Ebola scare in the last decade;
mass casualty incidents such as multiple traumas in blunt or
penetrating situations; or other crises that cause normal hos-
pital functions to cease or be altered significantly.
    Typically, hospitals start with an incident command team.
This should be structured to include key administrators,
department chairs or other designated leaders, the emer-
gency department, supply chain, nursing, bed control, and
other important stakeholders, some of which may be unique
to the crisis at hand. Many healthcare systems have a disaster
plan of some type, and this should be activated as soon as it
is apparent that the hospital’s function has to shift to new
priorities. Early priorities of the incident command team
should be to assess what critical resources are needed imme-
diately and what shortcomings they believe the healthcare
system or hospital has or will have and to establish a timeline
of need. They must begin to assess the capability of an
expanded number of beds (and where to house the surge of
patients) and an expanded number of critical care beds (and
again, where to house those units). They must also decide
whether or not the cause of the crisis will lead to unique
needs (e.g., in the case of an infectious pandemic, if isolation
beds will be needed and negative airflow rooms are available
or could be created). Communication systems have to be
tested and implemented.
    An important aspect of a crisis affecting healthcare deliv-
ery is the impact of this crisis on the local or regional area. If
the crisis affects many centers, such as the COVID-19 crisis,
regular communication between leadership of local hospi-
tals – even if from competing systems – is critical to under-
stand the regional impact of both the problem itself and the
Chapter 44. Maintaining Surgical Quality in the Setting...    843

altering of other healthcare deliveries. Further, if the crisis is
broader in scope, then communication between hospital lead-
ership (with representation on the incident command team)
and local, state, and federal government officials is also impor-
tant. These conversations must be bidirectional: the govern-
mental authorities need to learn about the scope of the
problem, and the hospital systems need to be informed about
decision-making that impacts delivery of care. One such
example during the COVID-19 crisis was the edict that elec-
tive surgery cease in most states. While societies such as the
American College of Surgeons (ACS) and SAGES published
communication suggesting the need to stop performing elec-
tive surgery, state governments and their Departments of
Health made the call for this to be implemented by hospitals.
   A critical step in early crisis management is to gain an
understanding how much “say” the healthcare providers
might have. In this example of the shutdown of elective sur-
gery, most states left it to surgeons to determine what cases
were truly elective and what cases were of an urgent or emer-
gent nature. While certainly some surgeons could abuse this
distinction, and still perform relatively elective cases (by call-
ing them “urgent”), it is incumbent upon operating room
leadership or department chairs to monitor for this activity
and stop it if necessary. Nonetheless, the decision-making
power should never be taken away from doctors and their
patients to make surgical decisions, and at least in this most
recent crisis, that decision was urged to stay between the pro-
viders and patients by both surgical societies and most states
governments.
   One of the most important tasks of the incident command
group is to have a committee or subgroup that monitors bed
availability. In surge conditions, they must continually plan
for new units to be created, staffed by appropriate nursing
and ancillary support, and to have these units equipped with
all of the necessary medical and computing equipment. As
the surge begins to ease, understanding how many beds per
day become available will be a necessary step before lifting a
844    J. R. Romanelli

prohibition on elective surgery. The same holds true for inter-
ventional radiology and interventional cardiology or vascular
procedures, which may require bed usage post-procedure.
   Central to quality in disaster management are data, trans-
parency, and continuous analysis. Hospital systems are able to
learn and adapt to various resource constraints using these
important principles. As regards data, critical to an institu-
tional response is the acceptance of information from all staff
and, uniquely for COVID, from around the world. The data
should be distilled and actionable such as the use of PaO2/
FiO2 ratio in determining which patient requires prone posi-
tioning or D-Dimer levels in determining which patients
require therapeutic anticoagulation. For transparency, daily
briefings within specific units and about overall hospital
operations reduce staff anxiety about resource constraints
and encourage collective solutions. Data transparency is
important at all levels from individual patients to regional
trends. Lastly, in learning, eventually, a generative approach
can be employed to anticipate and adapt; protocols are col-
lected, updated, and shared continuously based on data and
evidence. A mature operational team continuously reviews
performance and can plan for a progressively better response.


 essation of Elective Surgery
C
and Ramifications for Patient Care
The decision to cease elective surgery is a difficult one for
hospitals as it is a major source of revenue. It is typically a last
step that happens once a crisis situation unfolds. In the case
of COVID-19, this difficult decision was made by both societ-
ies and state governments, and it was one of the first times
that this has ever occurred on a mass scale, at least in the
United States.
   Once elective surgery stops, two situations must be moni-
tored. The first is that the clinical staff supporting surgeons
must be in contact with patients who are displaced off of the
schedule to ensure that their disease processes do not worsen,
Chapter 44. Maintaining Surgical Quality in the Setting...   845

moving them into the “urgent” category. If so, they need to be
re-scheduled and have their surgeries performed. The second
is that medical offices must keep “bumped patient lists” so
that re-scheduling can occur in a timely and orderly fashion
once the cessation of elective surgery is lifted.
   Another question that can be raised by the cessation of
elective surgical work is how to manage patients with unfold-
ing clinical needs. For example, a patient with right upper
quadrant pain might still be able to receive an ultrasound to
diagnose cholelithiasis. If that is negative, a nuclear medicine
study might be needed to diagnose biliary dyskinesia. But
what if that is unavailable? Would upper endoscopy be avail-
able, or were the endoscopy units also limited to emergent
and urgent cases only? And then how that patient would be
managed without surgical intervention?
   Separating patients into acuity levels is a potential helpful
exercise to help determine what patients should not be
delayed in receiving surgical care. The ACS published a very
helpful document [1] called COVID-19: Guidance for Triage
of Non-Emergent Surgical Procedures. In this document, they
described the Elective Surgery Acuity Scale, which separates
patients into three tiers based on low, intermediate, or high
acuity and then subdivides those tiers into healthy and
unhealthy patients. In this example, Tier 1 patients (low acu-
ity) are recommended for postponement of having the cases
be performed at an ambulatory surgery center (ASC); Tier 2
are recommended for postponement “if possible” or consid-
eration of being moved to an ASC; and Tier 3 are recom-
mended to not be postponed and should only be performed
at a hospital setting. Obviously, there is room for clinical
decision-making by the surgeon and patient in this regard.
   Cancer patients present a unique and interesting dilemma
regarding the timing of surgical intervention. SAGES pub-
lished very useful documents [2−4] offering recommenda-
tions on how to treat cancer patients in the setting of the
COVID-19 crisis, but these recommendations could be
broadly applied.
846   J. R. Romanelli

   Another consideration is that operating room personnel
are now a resource that could be redeployed into other criti-
cal need situations throughout the healthcare system. The
operating room nurses could assist with triage, help in other
critical care units, or work toward screening patients, in the
case of infectious disease. Post-anesthesia care units could be
re-purposed as critical care beds if needed. Hospital supply
chain personnel could be tasked with managing the needs
dictated by the crisis and as such could be diverted from
operating room tasks.


 carce Resource Allocation During a Medical
S
Crisis
One of the more frightening aspects of a crisis is the dwin-
dling of resources to an amount insufficient to meet the needs
of patients. One can argue that the inability to perform elec-
tive surgery amounts to a scarce resource situation. This con-
cept delves into ethical decision-making in choosing which
patients received what is deemed as limited in supply. An
early consideration for hospitals during, for example, a pan-
demic, is to form a scarce resource team led by an institu-
tional bioethicist (if one is available). The idea is that such a
team would comprise of clinicians that are not charged with
taking care of a particular patient facing a need of an item in
scarce supply at the given time. The formation of a team like
this would be directed by the incident command team.
   During the early part of the COVID-19 pandemic, a central
concern was the availability of ventilators. Confronting the
difficult c­ oncept of having to choose between two patients for
one available ventilator is a terrifying prospect for physicians
who took an oath to “Do no harm.” Having guidance as to
how to choose which patient is awarded the scarce resource is
impossible as the clinician charged with care delivery to mul-
tiple patients that may drain said resources. Given that we all
serve as advocates for those we care for, it would be a conflict
to advocate for the same ventilator for two different patients.
Alas, the concept of a scarce resource team, divorced from
Chapter 44. Maintaining Surgical Quality in the Setting...    847

direct care delivery, can help choose where to allocate ventila-
tors when there remains an insufficient number.
    This concept is not limited to ventilators during an infec-
tious pandemic. Dialysis could become available on a limited
basis if many patients were going into acute renal failure. And
of course, many care givers were troubled by a lack of appro-
priate personal protective equipment during the recent pan-
demic. Even operating room availability in a mass casualty
event should be considered a scarce resource.
    There are medical resources to guide scarce allocation
teams in decision-making. The Massachusetts Department
of Public Health issued this guide [5] to advocate for the
formation of teams such as described herein and to help clini-
cians make these difficult decisions. Typically, one must factor
survivability as an initial criterion. Triaging patients into low,
intermediate, and high chance of survival can help to direct
resources appropriately. This concept originated in battlefield
and military medicine but can certainly be applied in a civil-
ian crisis. Next a score such as SOFA (Sequential Organ
Failure Assessment) could be employed to help make such a
determination. The elements of SOFA [6] include PaO2/FiO2
ratio, platelet count, total bilirubin, blood pressure, Glasgow
Coma Scale, and creatinine, thus quantifying dysfunction of
the respiratory, coagulation, hepatic, cardiovascular, neuro-
logic, and renal systems. This score could be combined with
an analysis of major comorbidities and indicators of 1-year
morbidity to objectively predict which patient has a better
chance for survival and thus would be more appropriate to
direct a resource toward.
    Trauma systems apply these lessons of scarce resource
allocation by using two principles: reduction of uncertainty
through risk stratification (triage) and staged interventions
that achieve the most in a minimal time. Quality, in a classic
mass casualty event, means that arriving patients should be
quickly risk stratified based on their apparent injury and vital
signs, imaging studies kept to a minimum, and interventions
be limited to 30–60 min per patient. This allows for rescue
first, followed by recovery and restoration. Arguably, the
nature of the COVID-19 pandemic cannot achieve this type
848   J. R. Romanelli

of quality, as scientists have not identified a means to rapidly
limit the extent of illness on presentation, while risk stratifica-
tion requires time and extensive testing. The best achievable
quality for this current mass casualty event is in the preven-
tion of errors, that is, good quality might be defined by teams
adept at early identification of escalating severity. Good qual-
ity might be defined by rapid intervention teams that are
organized around specific interventions such as intubation,
proning, invasive lines, or clinical trial enrollment.
    Surgeons bring unique skills in this scarce resource alloca-
tion situation. Surgeons could and should be added to alloca-
tion teams, especially if time is freed with the shutdown of
elective surgery, such as in COVID-19. Given that general
surgeons have to be conscientious of all organ systems, they,
along with internists, can take a generalized look at patients
without the bias of being a single-organ system-based special-
ist. Further, surgeons might be forced into making these dif-
ficult choices if operating rooms become scarce (like a mass
casualty situation) or if post-anesthesia care unit or critical
care beds are limited by a patient surge. Lastly, surgeons may
have to decide upon the relative urgency of a disease process
to decide if patients need to have their operations performed
in a more timely fashion, as previously described, and some
of these tools could be employed to help in that decision-­
making analysis (e.g., choosing which urgent patient to oper-
ate on first).


Redeployment of the Surgical Workforce
 During a Crisis
In some critical situations, surgeons may be forced to rede-
ploy to other areas of the hospital to augment the existing, if
not exhausted, workforce. This might mean seeing patients in
the emergency department; it might mean working in inten-
sive or critical care units; or it might mean covering other
areas of general surgery such as trauma or emergency general
surgery. As stated in the SAGES publication, the Primer for
Taking Care of Yourself During and After the COVID-19
Chapter 44. Maintaining Surgical Quality in the Setting...      849

Crisis [7], while being forced into unplanned clinical situa-
tions may provoke feelings of fear and anxiety, “what we do
know is that regardless of our current specialty and regardless
of the time since we practiced general medicine, that our con-
tribution in fighting this medical nightmare is a unique and
noble one. Our surgical training and heritage will support us.
The role we may serve during the present need eclipses and
stretches our normal patterns of practice, but not beyond the
depth of our training backgrounds.” Certainly needing to
cover trauma admissions may seem uncomfortable and out-
right daunting after not performing trauma surgery for
years – decades? – but our training will indeed begin to guide
us, and our colleagues deployed to critical care units for pan-
demic needs can certainly assist us in decision-making.
Materials such as those published as a part of ATLS can also
serve as a reminder of basic core principles to help the rede-
ployed surgeon.
   Further, the surgical workforce comprises of more than just
the attending surgeons. Trainees or advanced practice provid-
ers may also need to cover different areas of the hospital,
leaving surgical teams short of their normal coverage. OR
nurses or PACU nurses may be asked to work in other areas
of the healthcare system to help handle surge or crisis needs,
or they may be uprooted from an ambulatory OR to an inpa-
tient OR. This may force urgent surgical procedures to be
conducted with an unfamiliar team, which can hamper out-
comes, slow operative times, and lead to frustration on the
part of the surgeon or the team. Thus it becomes incumbent to
prepare diligently for these cases, foster good communication
in the room (and with the anesthesia team), and anticipate
delays that would otherwise be atypical. Similarly, anesthesia
staff will likely be asked to help in the critical care units in the
setting of a pandemic or mass casualty, reducing the comple-
ment of available anesthetists that can work in the operating
room. Lastly, hospital systems may have to divert resources
away from community hospital settings toward the tertiary
care centers as they may need an increase in help to combat
the crisis. This may adversely impact the ability for surgeons to
be able to care for their patients at the community hospital.
850   J. R. Romanelli

   The ultimate concern for surgeons is to be placed into a
situation where they have to urgently operate on a disease
process or patient with a clinical situation far outside the
norm of their practice. While there is no “one size fits all”
solution to this issue, open discussion with surgical leaders at
your institution about your concerns, communication with
colleagues with more experience in treating the problem, and
utilizing best clinical judgment and learning developed after
rigorous and thorough surgical training and experience
should, at a minimum, produce an outcome that is acceptable
given the difficulties and obstacles created by the crisis.
“Damage control” methodology might serve as a base to
deliver the patient to an acceptable state until more experi-
enced help can be lent to aid in the definitive surgical proce-
dure to address an emergent problem. Also, some clinical
decisions might need to be altered given the limitations in
resources; for example, if the institution has no critical care
beds available, then leaving the patient intubated with an
open abdomen and wound vac may not be preferable in a
patient with an acute abdominal catastrophe. In that case,
temporary closure of the abdomen and extubation may be a
preferable alternative.


 elays in Care Delivery of Routine Problems
D
Due to the Crisis
One of the unexpected issues that may arise during or after a
crisis situation, especially if prolonged, is the delay in treating
clinical problems. This may lead to disease processes that
worsen over the interval of time that operating rooms are not
functioning at peak capacity. This has the potential to be a
hidden issue as patients may avoid coming to the hospital for
a period of time even after the crisis eases. One can foresee
that, in an infectious disease crisis, patients may be afraid to
present with clinical problems for fear of catching the illness
and then in turn putting their families at risk.
Chapter 44. Maintaining Surgical Quality in the Setting...     851

    There are two aspects to this delay in care. The first is obvi-
ous – clinical problems such as biliary colic, diverticulitis, or
paraesophageal hernia with volvulus that may not be emer-
gent, and may not even be urgent, so they are delayed during
the period of reduced operating room availability. While
these patients can potentially wait to receive surgery, they
also are not purely elective cases (e.g., bariatric or cosmetic
surgery). It is incumbent on surgeons and their outpatient
staff to remain in communication with patients, who may
become urgent should their disease and symptoms worsen.
One can surmise that these patients could easily be over-
looked as the emphasis on care delivery is crisis-related, but
this could lead to worsened outcomes if the operation is then
performed under less-than-ideal circumstances.
    The second aspect to care delays is patient-driven. During
the COVID-19 crisis, there were anecdotal reports of an
increase in the number of amputations from limbs that were
not salvaged by vascular surgery due to patients remaining at
home for fear of contracting the virus. There were similar
reports of patients presenting in a delayed fashion with long
bone fractures, who presented with DVT and/or pulmonary
emboli that may not have occurred had the orthopedic
repairs taken place shortly after injury. One could foresee
diverticulitis turning into an urgent Hartmann’s procedure
rather than a planned minimally invasive diverticular
­resection due to the disease smoldering at home without
 timely intervention. Although surgeons could not have pre-
 vented these complications, it is important to consider how
 messaging is done by healthcare systems about the safety of
 having medical procedures performed in the setting of an
 infectious pandemic. Similarly, in the urban mass casualty set-
 ting, indicating that the area around the hospital is safe for
 patients to arrive and receive care can help prevent unneces-
 sary delays in treating urgent problems, which could then lead
 to poorer outcomes.
852   J. R. Romanelli

 e-emergence Back into Elective Surgical
R
Care Following a Crisis
How to reschedule surgery must be coordinated with the
operating room as block availability may not immediately be
repatriated. At the hospital level, decisions have to be made
as to what types of surgery to prioritize. For example, the
hospitals may want to begin with purely outpatient proce-
dures at low risk for needing an inpatient bed when overall
bed availability may be strained. In hospital systems that
blend employed and private practice surgeons, there might be
consideration of giving the private surgeons earlier or more
access to operating rooms as they were likely financially
impacted by the crisis in a more severe manner. Certainly,
acuity should be considered in the rescheduling of cases. One
must also consider the impact on cancer patients that might
have been delayed; these cases may have some priority
although one could argue that some of the patients were
likely given different care plans (chemotherapy, radiation
therapy, etc.) to initiate some form of treatment while waiting
for surgery to become an option. The remaining cancers
likely were tumors with slow growth (e.g., papillary thyroid,
prostate), such that the delay likely would not have impacted
the outcome. Nonetheless, it is likely that surgical oncologists
would want some type of priority prior to initiating a re-
emergence plan. SAGES has released an excellent document
with ­recommendations as to how to manage cancer patients
during the COVID-19 crisis [7], but how to integrate the
delayed patients back into the operating room schedule is a
concept made more complex by the interim care decisions
that were implemented during the delay.
    An obvious factor in developing such a re-emergence plan
is the total number of operating rooms available. Was some of
the PACU space re-allocated to critical care beds? If so, this
can limit how much surgery – elective or not – can be com-
pleted safely. When governmental agencies lift the restric-
tions on elective surgeries, will the hospitals have the full
Chapter 44. Maintaining Surgical Quality in the Setting...   853

suite of rooms available? Will redeployed staff now be repa-
triated to the operating room? Will the anesthesia staff be
completely available for the operating room schedule? Can
outlying community hospitals in healthcare systems be uti-
lized as an alternative source of operating room real estate –
and can the same level of surgical quality be delivered there?
Are there staff losses from people who left healthcare jobs
later in the pandemic that now impact the number of operat-
ing rooms that can be safely utilized?
   Furthermore, some thought has to be given to what
occurred with patients during the delay created by the crisis.
For instance, what happens if bariatric patients gained weight
during the period of delay – should that now further delay
their ability to undergo elective bariatric surgery? What hap-
pens if patients who had stable medical conditions have wors-
ened while at home and isolated – do they now need more
extensive preoperative medical clearance (which, in turn, will
delay them further)? Do patients need to be seen again by
surgeons, either in the office or via video or telehealth, prior
to rescheduling their operations?
   The recovery of normal operations across the United
States and globally is dependent on local epidemiology, but
the quality metrics remain the same. CMS has suspended
penalties understanding that quality metrics will be necessar-
ily be worse under the pandemic; however, at least a few
regions that have achieved low infection levels have returned
to normal levels of surgical volume with normalized quality.
Length of stay, mortality, thromboembolic events, respiratory
failure, and renal failure were measurably worse for surgical
patients requiring urgent and emergent care but have
improved to baseline during the period of recovery. Unwinding
the redeployed surgical workforce and their operating envi-
ronment requires attention to our quality systems and met-
rics. They serve as a guide to safe restoration. If quality
remains compromised during recovery, we as surgeons must
use our measurement systems to understand why and course
correct.
854   J. R. Romanelli

   While during a crisis the return to “normal” is a highly
desirable achievement, arriving there in a safe and orderly
fashion actually represents a complex series of decisions, both
by providers and hospitals, to ensure maximum efficiency,
safe surgical outcomes, and the ability to service all of those
who were inconvenienced by the crisis itself.


Conclusion
A crisis such as a pandemic or mass casualty creates a ripple
effect across a healthcare system; surgery is one of the most
affected areas. Hospital resources often have to be comman-
deered quickly to provide for the needs of the crisis. The ces-
sation of elective surgical care wreaks havoc with schedules
and inconveniences of many patients but is often a necessary
step to prepare for a surge of admitted patients. Scarce
resources need to be allocated and addressed in a thoughtful,
yet ethical manner. The surgeons and their teams may have to
be redeployed to other areas of critical need. Delays in care
may have clinical ramifications for patients that have to be
dealt with and may worsen their ultimate outcomes.
Emergence from the crisis and gravitating back to normal
involves critical discussions with key stakeholders in a fair
attempt to provide the best care to the most patients in as
timely a fashion as possible.


References
 1. https://www.facs.org/covid-19/clinical-guidance/triage.
 2. https://www.sages.org/recommendations-surgical-management-
    colorectal-cancer-covid-19/.
 3. https://www.sages.org/sages-recommendations-surgical-manage-
    ment-gastric-cancer-covid-19-crisis/.
 4. https://www.sages.org/sages-ahpba-recommendations-surgical-
    management-of-hpb-cancer-covid-19/.
Chapter 44. Maintaining Surgical Quality in the Setting...      855

5. https://www.mass.gov/doc/crisis-standards-of-care-draft-planning-
   guidance-for-public-comment-october-6-2020/download.
6. https://www.mdcalc.com/sequential-organ-failure-assessment-sofa-
   score.
7. Dort J, Romanelli J, Choudhury N, et al. SAGES primer for tak-
   ing care of yourself during and after the COVID-19 crisis. Surg
   Endosc. 2020;34(7):2856–62.
Chapter 45
Ergonomic Considerations
for Surgeon Physical
Wellness
Marinda Scrushy and Diana L. Diesen


Introduction

Why Does Ergonomics Matter?

Work-related injuries in healthcare are common: OSHA
reports hospital workers have a higher risk of injury or illness
requiring time away from work than construction workers or
manufacturing sector workers [1], and hospitals have a
worker injury rate three times that of professionals in other
traditional professional or business services. Greater than
64% of hospital worker injuries are musculoskeletal (MSK)
in nature, involving injury to muscles, nerves, tendons, joints,
cartilage, or spinal discs. When these injuries are sustained
due to the work environment, prolonged working time, or the
performance of specific work, they are referred to as work-­
related MSK disorders (WR-MSKD) [2]. Costs associated
with these injuries, which include medical cost, lost wages,



M. Scrushy · D. L. Diesen (*)
Department of Surgery, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX, USA
e-mail: MARINDA.SCRUSHY@phhs.org

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature   857
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_45
858   M. Scrushy and D. L. Diesen

decreased productivity, sick time, turnover, and decreased
quality of life are estimated at $200 billion annually based on
workers’ compensation losses [3]. Unfortunately, work-­
related injuries are vastly underreported particularly in the
surgical specialties.
   WR-MSKD are due to a combination of repetitive activi-
ties, prolonged static positions, extreme body positions, and
vibrating tools, all of which are common during surgery, put-
ting surgeons at particularly high risk for work-related MSK
disorders. The incidence of work-related MSK injuries in
surgeons is remarkably high, with rates of 72–87.5% in open
surgeons [4–8],78–100% for laparoscopic surgeons [9, 10],
and 28–45% for robotic surgeons [11, 12].
   The most common sites for pain or injury were back, neck,
arms, and shoulders. These injuries are found across surgical
specialties [2].
   The physical environment, the surgical tools/equipment,
the physical demands, and the overall culture of surgery put
surgeons at increased risk for injury. Healthcare is often seen
as a selfless profession, with healthcare workers often ignor-
ing their own health or being injured as they put the patient’s
well-being above their own. Furthermore, the surgical culture
of efficiency, strong work ethic, and grit puts surgeons at even
higher risk. An institutional survey found that 65% of sur-
geons never sought help or reported their injuries to occupa-
tional health [5].
   The consequences of surgeon injury are far-reaching,
impacting not only the surgeon but also the healthcare sys-
tem and patients. Surgeon injury leads to missed days of
work, fewer operations, and even early retirement [3] and can
lead to a decline in surgeon wellness by increasing fatigue,
affecting personal relationships, decreasing sleep, and increas-
ing fear of surgical error while operating [15]. Surgeon dis-
comfort while operating may influence surgical approach,
with up to 30% of surgeons in one survey reporting that they
took their own physical symptoms into account when recom-
mending a surgical approach to the patient [13]. The burden
on the healthcare system includes costs of injury treatment,
    Chapter 45. Ergonomic Considerations for Surgeon…    859

increased utilization of resources, decreased operating room
efficiency, and increased missed days of work.
   This chapter focuses on the ergonomic challenges spe-
cific to surgeons and optimal ergonomic strategies to miti-
gate these challenges. Attention to these strategies can
improve the mental and physical well-being of the surgeon,
the outcomes of the patients, and efficacy of our healthcare
system.


Ergonomic Challenges in the Operating Room

Posture and Operative Fatigue

Activities in the operating room are prone to repetitive
movements and awkward body positioning including
extreme trunk rotation, arm movements, and significant
force on the neck, spine, and upper extremities. Furthermore,
static positions while operating can lead to a maladaptive
posture that increases compressive force on surrounding tis-
sues over time [16]. The type of surgical procedure, instru-
ments, equipment, and duration of operation are also
significant contributors to MSK pain. Studies have used
electromyography (EMG) to measure muscle fatigue and
stress while operating. Changes on EMG can be correlated
to indicate muscle fatigue as well as measure the contrac-
tion force of the muscle [17], with muscle fatigue noted to
increase as operative time increases [18].


Instruments and Equipment

Some of the factors in the operating room that contribute to
MSK pain are specialized equipment such as loupes and
headlamps, surgical instruments, operating table height, and
monitor height.
  Loupes and headlamps contribute to cervical spine symp-
toms due to increased weight on the head and neck, which
860   M. Scrushy and D. L. Diesen

alters the surgeon’s posture and causes an increase in neck
flexion and forward head position. Positions that require
neck flexion greater than 15° are more likely to cause cervical
spine pain and increase cervical loading up to 40% [19].
Similarly, microscopic surgery causes the neck to be in
extreme flexion or laterally deviated for prolonged periods of
time [16]. Improper table height has been cited as the most
common cause of pain following surgery, and inappropriate
monitor positioning during laparoscopic surgery can lead to
awkward trunk and neck rotation [5].
   Poor positioning of the operating table and monitors dur-
ing minimally invasive surgery (MIS) can lead to static or
abnormal positioning of head, neck, and back. The use of the
laparoscope also leads to uncomfortable arm positioning in
order to achieve appropriate camera view [20]. The level of
upper extremity muscle strain as measured by EMG is signifi-
cantly higher while performing laparoscopic surgery when
compared to other surgical modalities [21]. Laparoscopic
instrument design may contribute to increased muscle strain
and fatigue, as these instruments are designed with a long
shaft requiring excessive force and pressure in order to
manipulate the tools [22]. Poor instrument handle design also
contributes to MSK pain and fatigue of the wrist and hands
by altering upper extremity posture [2, 21]. When compared
to robotic surgery, traditional laparoscopic surgery has shown
higher muscle activation and strain. Muscle fatigue is the
highest in the upper extremities including biceps, triceps, and
deltoid muscles [23, 24]. In addition, robotic instruments have
better ergonomic outcomes for surgeons due to improvement
in hand posture [25].


Implications of Poor Ergonomics

The risk of poor ergonomics for the surgeon is risk of physical
injury, fatigue, frustration, burnout, disability, and even the
need for early retirement. When examined over a 12-month
period, the estimates for WR-MSK pain were of the 65%
    Chapter 45. Ergonomic Considerations for Surgeon…        861

neck, 52% shoulder, 59% back, and 39% upper extremity
[26]. These rates are comparable with manual labor occupa-
tions such as construction workers. This pain has been found
to interfere with personal relationships, impair sleep, increase
time away from work, increase need for medication and
physical therapy, and reduce technical performance [27]. This
physical pain combined with impaired relationships, decreased
sleep, and limitations on one’s practice surgery can ultimately
led to burnout and/or early retirement [28].
   Less is known about the direct effect of poor ergonomics
and work-related injuries experienced during surgery on
patient outcomes. Previous research looking at nurses has
shown an increase in medication errors and infections related
to caregiver fatigue, injury, and stress [1]. Lower patient satis-
faction scores are associated with higher rates of job dissatis-
faction, burnout, and frustration among the nursing staff [29].
   The direct impact of WR-MSKD on patients is difficult to
assess, as the only data available to date is retrospective self-­
reporting from surgeons who stated they took their own dis-
comfort into account when deciding on an approach to a
patient or reporting their pain affected their surgical care
[13]. Other surveys have shown that 55% surgeons said their
injuries had impact on surgical performance, with 13%
reporting moderate to severe impact on surgical performance
[3]. These numbers assume surgeon self-awareness of the
impact of their injuries and thus are likely an underestima-
tion of the true impact on patient care. This area needs
focused attention and research.
   When surgeons are injured, there is a much larger cost to
the overall healthcare system. Substantial investment is made
in the medical education and training of surgeons. When a
surgeon is unable to fully work due to injury or illness, his/her
position cannot be quickly filled given that it takes 5–10 years
after medical school to train a surgeon. If a significant pro-
portion of surgeons are experiencing chronic, repetitive inju-
ries, the potential workforce impact and cost on society are
considerable.
862   M. Scrushy and D. L. Diesen

   The direct, immediate cost of MSKD is the most obvious.
These costs include cost of medical treatment, but there are
other implications to the health system including absentee-
ism, reduced workload, early retirement, delays in patient
care, and decreased team morale. Work-related injuries
caused 22–27% of surgeons to take time off from work [3].
Those surgeons at highest risk included those aged >55 years,
with more than 20 years of practice, and with an increasing
number of procedures per year [30]. Fifty-three percent
reported their injuries resulted in minimal or moderate
effects on performance in OR [3]. Of surgeons who experi-
enced an injury, 35% of surgeons had to cut back on opera-
tions during recovery [3]. For example, 27% of orthopedic
surgeons reported an incidence of cervical radiculopathy,
with 10.7% requiring surgery and 19% requiring time off
work/early retirement [31]. Sivak-Callcott et al. found that
31% of surgeons had symptomatic bulging or herniated spi-
nal discs. Of those surgeons with injuries, 2% had to modify
their practice, 7.6% had to undergo surgery, and 9.2% had to
retire due to injury [7].
   MSKD are the number one cause of long-term disability
claims and 20% of short-term disability pain, with acute back
pain being the most common cause. Specifically, one in five
short-term disability claims is caused by some form of MSK
disorder [32]. Nearly 20% of surgeons in the UK and the
USA and 15% of surgeons surveyed in Germany think they
may need to retire early due to physical impact of conducting
laparoscopic surgery [14]. While these rates of injuries are
surprisingly high, only 19% of surgeons reported their inju-
ries to their institution; the implication of these injuries may
be grossly underestimated by the institution [3].


Strategies for Optimal Ergonomic Approach
The surgical community’s awareness and appreciation of the
ergonomic challenges in the operating room has increased,
and with this increasing knowledge comes innovation and
    Chapter 45. Ergonomic Considerations for Surgeon…      863

research to attempt to mitigate the consequences. Studies
have focused on four specific areas in order to decrease the
incidence of surgeon pain: First, increasing surgeon aware-
ness of their own ergonomics and how they can design their
operating room to accommodate these needs. Second, institu-
tions have trialed developing ergonomics education pro-
grams that focus on increasing physician knowledge of
ergonomics, how to avoid pitfalls, and an emphasis on institu-
tional resources. Third, an emphasis on microbreaks, or small
intra-operative pauses, to avoid or improve poor posture has
also been provided. Last, development of specialized instru-
ments and equipment has been suggested as a potential
solution.


Surgeon Awareness of Their Environment [20]

It is imperative for surgeons to be aware of their environ-
ment and be proactive in designing an operating room that
appeals to their individual ergonomic needs. This includes
operating room setup as well as awareness of their own pos-
ture to make necessary adjustments to decrease their risk of
injury. Studies have found that poor personal postural
awareness and lack of attention to ergonomic design of the
operating room are some of the most common causes of
MSK injuries [19]. The need for proper room setup is spe-
cifically important in laparoscopic surgery where multiple
different types of equipment are required to perform a case.
Important variables in room setup include monitor posi-
tioning, choosing specialized instruments, optimal operating
table height, and foot pedal placement. The implementation
of an operating room checklists designed by each surgeon
prior to the start of the case is one solution. Surgeons should
also be aware of their own individual ideal table height,
calculated to be 21 cm lower than the elbow height of the
surgeon [33].
864   M. Scrushy and D. L. Diesen

Setting Up the Operating Room for Success

During the performance of surgery, awkward body position-
ing is required at times, so it is important for surgeons to
maintain a neutral body position throughout as much of the
case as possible. The bed height should be positioned for the
tallest surgeon, with steps provided for other team members
to ensure every member of the team has optimal positioning.
The bed height is calculated to be 21 cm lower than the elbow
height of the tallest surgeon [33]. The bed height should be
such that the upper arms are perpendicular to the floor and
90° to the forearms with the shoulder at <30 degrees of
abduction. The forearms should be parallel to the floor and
neither supinated nor pronated with the elbows between 90°
and 120° (Fig. 45.1, Table 45.1). The back and trunk should be
positioned perpendicular to the floor with the feet hip’s width
apart with weight distributed evenly between both feet.
Twisting or flexing the pelvic girdle should be avoided when
possible.
   Monitors should be positioned 10–30° below eye level
(Fig. 45.1). Every degree of extension above the horizon
increases cervical load, which is exacerbated if wearing
loupes or a headlight [34–36]. Repeated sustained increases
in cervical load with or without shearing forces are thought to
exacerbate or accelerate development of degenerative disc
disease.
   Elbows should rest at the surgeon’s side with horizontal
forearms. This neutral position allows for a greater range of
motion when operating laparoscopically by allowing instru-
ments to be comfortably moved up and down in the laparo-
scopic ports [33]. Studies have implemented the use of arm
rests during laparoscopic surgery to keep a neutral arm and
shoulder position, which improved discomfort in test sub-
jects while they performed prolonged laparoscopic skills
tasks [37].
   It is important to maintain a neutral position when seated.
A neutral seated position is sitting upright with a small lum-
bar lordosis (natural curve in the small of the back) and the
    Chapter 45. Ergonomic Considerations for Surgeon…      865




Figure 45.1 Ergonomic laparoscopic arrangement. (Reprinted with
permission from Ronstrom et al. [54])

shoulders back. The feet should rest on the ground with the
knees at least a 90-degree angle or greater [38]. When per-
forming robotic surgery, the feet should be positioned so that
no more than 25 degrees of movement is needed to activate
the foot pedal [39].


Education

A survey of physicians showed that 100% of them thought
that ergonomics were important, although 89% had poor
866     M. Scrushy and D. L. Diesen

Table 45.1 Published surgical ergonomics recommendations, listed
by applicable body site or equipment
                                                  Studies—
Body part/                                        first author,
equipment        Recommendation                   year(s)
Shoulder/        Upper arm should remain          Craven
upper arm        perpendicular to floor           2013
                 Shoulders should be dropped         Rosenblatt
                 and hands relaxed. Intraoperative   2013
                 stretching with arm raises
                 recommended
                 Shoulder abduction should be        Xiao 2012
                 <30°. Arms should be slightly
                 abducted and rotated inward
                 Assistants should rotate            Hullfish
                 responsibility for retraction to    2009
                 avoid prolonged strain for any
                 individual
                 In laparoscopic and vaginal
                 surgery, assistants and surgeons
                 should consider rotating sides to
                 balance upper extremity strain
Forearm/         Angle between forearm and           Craven
elbow            upper arm should be 90°             2013
                 To avoid excessive elbow flexion/   Matern
                 extension, forearm should be held   2009
                 in horizontal position, parallel
                 to the floor. To avoid excessive
                 torque, forearm should be held
                 in neutral position between
                 supination and pronation
                 Elbows should be held between       Xiao 2012
                 90-and 120-degree flexion
Wrist            Wrist should be held in slight      Matern
                 extension with fingers bent         2009
                 slightly
    Chapter 45. Ergonomic Considerations for Surgeon…            867

Table 45.1 (continued)
                                                       Studies—
Body part/                                             first author,
equipment       Recommendation                         year(s)
                Avoid wrist deviations beyond          Van Veelen
                20-degree extension, 40-degree         2004
                flexion, 15-degree radial deviation,
                and 25-degree ulnar deviation.
                Extreme wrist excursions should
                not occupy >30% of operating
                time
Hand/fingers    Instruments should not require         Van Veelen
                more force than 15 N to                2004
                completely close
Neck            Neck flexion should be about           Craven
                20°. In robotic surgery, forehead      2013
                should rest only lightly on the
                headrest
                Surgeons should avoid excessive        Rosenblatt
                “head forward” posture, as this        2013
                increases degenerative changes in
                the cervical spine
                Prolonged static positioning of the    Szeto 2012
                neck, particularly if in excessive
                flexion, should be avoided
                Neck should be flexed at an angle      Van Det
                between 10 and 30°. Excessive          2008
                twisting should be avoided;
                surgeons should limit axial
                rotation to less than 15°
Back/trunk      Avoid pelvic girdle asymmetry          Rosenblatt
                by keeping feel hip’s width apart      2013
                with weight evenly distributed
                                                         (continued)
868   M. Scrushy and D. L. Diesen

Table 45.1 (continued)
                                                     Studies—
Body part/                                           first author,
equipment       Recommendation                       year(s)
                Do not lock knees. Engage deep
                muscles of trunk and pelvis
                to maintain neutral position.
                Perform postural “resets” and
                intraoperative stretching with
                squats
                Prolonged static positioning         Szeto 2012
                should be avoided
Lower           In robotic surgery, excessive knee   Craven
extremity       flexion should be avoided. Feel      2013
                should rest on ground in front of
                pedals at angle ≥90°
                Dorsal flexion of the fool should    Van Veelen
                be <25° when controlling foot        2004
                switch
                Consider antifatigue mats in the     Hullfish
                operating room to decrease lower     2009
                extremity fatigue. Surgeons should
                also consider supportive hose if
                prolonged standing is required
Monitor         Laparoscopic monitors should be      Van Det
position        between 10 and 30° below eye         2009
                level
                Image should be 15–45° below         Van Veelen
                eye level                            2004
                Screen height of 160 cm is           Zehetner
                recommended                          2006
Table height    Table heights in general should      Hullfish
                be adjusted to the height of the     2009
                tallest surgeon with step stools
                used for other team members
    Chapter 45. Ergonomic Considerations for Surgeon…           869

Table 45.1 (continued)
                                                     Studies—
Body part/                                           first author,
equipment       Recommendation                       year(s)
                In vaginal surgery, surgeons         Hullfish
                should be seated whenever            2009
                possible with table and stool
                heights adjusted so primary
                surgeon is looking straight ahead
                To prevent extreme upper             Berquer
                extremity excursions during          2002
                laparoscopic surgery, the
                operating table should be between
                a factor 0.7 and 0.8 of surgeons’
                elbow height so instruments can
                rotate around elbow level
Standing        Standing support adjustable          Van Veelen
support         between 780 and 1020 mm may          2004
                help prevent prolonged static
                standing posture
Instrument      Working angle between                Matern
manipulation    instruments when stitching and       2009
                knotting should be 60°. This will
                keep arms in comfortable, slightly
                inwardly rotated, position
                Instrument intracorporeal to         Xiao 2012
                extracorporeal ratio should be >1
Arm boards      To avoid trunk twisting, surgeons    Rosenblatt
                should tuck patient’s arms           2013
                whenever possible
Foot pedal      Surgeons should be able to reach     Matern
position        pedals without balancing on one      2009
                foot
                                                       (continued)
870    M. Scrushy and D. L. Diesen

Table 45.1 (continued)
                                                        Studies—
Body part/                                              first author,
equipment        Recommendation                         year(s)
                 Foot pedals should be placed           Rosenblatt
                 next to foot in line with target       2013
                 instruments toward the target
                 quadrant
Postsurgery      Perform neck, hamstring, and           Hullfish
interventions    back stretches immediately after       2009
                 breaking scrub. Surgeons should
                 incorporate stretching/flexibility
                 modules into their exercise
                 programs (e.g., yoga, pilates) and
                 engage in regular massage
Reprinted with permission from Catanzarite et al. [2]

understanding of the ergonomic recommendations and
resources at their own institutions [13]. This lack of training is
strikingly high as studies have shown clear benefit from pro-
viding physicians with formal ergonomic training and physi-
cal tools to improve posture and decrease their pain [40].
Ergonomics training for surgical residents has shown particu-
lar benefits including overall decrease in pain and improve-
ment in posture with targeted instruction by physical therapist
targeting common areas of fatigue and pain [41]. Integration
of ergonomic training early (medical school/residency) has
the greatest potential to prevent these MSK injuries improv-
ing quality of life for the surgeon, extending years of practice,
improving patient care, reducing burnout, and decreasing
overall healthcare costs.


Steps to Alleviate Strain

Maintaining static body positions for extended lengths of
time can lead to muscle fatigue and strain. There are steps
available to mitigate the stress on the body during prolonged
    Chapter 45. Ergonomic Considerations for Surgeon…            871

cases. For example, movement or rotation of the muscle
groups responsible for retracting, changing position of the
hands while retracting if possible, alternating hands [39], and
intraoperative stretching with the arms raised [42] can all
help mitigate prolonged strain on the muscles.
   Neck flexion should be limited to approximately 20° to
limit the strain on the neck [43]. Axial rotation should be
limited to 15°, and excessive twisting or straining of the neck
from a neutral position should be avoided [35].
   Cervical stretches, specifically extension exercises, can
help mitigate the strain on the neck. These stretches are
shown in Fig. 45.2, Panel 1, and are performed by starting
with the head displaced anteriorly and then pulling the head




Figure 45.2 Stretches to address highest risk areas – before, during,
and/or after surgery. Panel 1 Cervical retraction to counterbalance
the excessive cervical load caused by flexion with or without head-
lights and loupes during the procedure. One may also perform cervi-
cal lateral flexion for cases with particular neck strain. Panel 2
Lumbar extension to counterbalance the excessive lumbar flexion
during the case. Panel 3 Shoulders and upper back. Postural reset is
performed by raising arm up above your head with the thumbs fac-
ing forward and then bringing arms straight down to your sides
while pressing scapula together. (Reprinted with permission from
Hullfish et al. [39])
872   M. Scrushy and D. L. Diesen




Figure 45.2 (continued)
    Chapter 45. Ergonomic Considerations for Surgeon…       873




Figure 45.2 (continued)

back into an exaggerated posterior position. These cervical
stretches are particularly helpful if the head is in an abnormal
position for an extended period or if the surgeon is wearing
loupes or a headlamp. Other exercises including stretching
exercises focusing on the trapezius, sternocleidomastoid, and
levator scapulae have been shown to improve cervical spine
pain and reduce forward head positioning by strengthening
the muscles responsible for deep cervical flexion [44]
(Fig. 45.3).
   Core strength is key to alleviating strain on the back and
trunk. Engagement of the deep muscles of the trunk is
needed to maintain neutral positioning. Regular postural
resets and intraoperative stretching with squats and lumbar
extensions (as shown in Fig. 45.2, Panel 2) can mitigate the
flexion often needed during surgical procedures. Postural
reset is performed by raising the arms up above the head with
the thumbs facing forward and then bringing the arms
straight down to the sides of the body while pressing the
scapulae together (Fig. 45.2, Panel 3). These exercises can be
874    M. Scrushy and D. L. Diesen

Neck & Head forward/flexion Exercises
1. Wall Chin Tucks (2 sets 30-40 secs)
2. Supine Neck Flexion (2 sets 30-40secs)
3. Lacrosse Ball Upper Trap Release
4. True Lateral Neck Flexion with Depressed Shoulders (2 sets x 5-8 reps)

Shoulders & Internal Rotation Exercises
1. Y 's, T 's, W's (3 sets, 5-10 reps with 3 second hold)
2. Wall Slide (3 sets: 30 second hold at 90, then 10 slides overhead)
3. Doorway Pectoralis Stretch (2-3 sets, 30-60 sec hold)
4. Pectoralis Minor Release with Lacrosse Ball (1x 1-2min)
5. Latissimus Dorsi Release with Lacrosse Ball (1x 1-2min)
6. Doorway stretch ( 2-3 sets, 30-60 sec hold)

Thoracic Spine Mobility
1. Prone Ws, Ys, Ts Extensions (2 sets x 8-10 reps, hold 3 secs)
2. Foam Roller Extensions ( 2-3 sets x 30 secs)
3. Puppy Dog Stretch (2-3 sets x 30 secs)
4. Cat-Cow Yoga (2 sets x 5 reps, hold 3 seconds at each position)

Lumbar Spine, Pelvic Tilt & Lower Extremity
1. Waiters Bow with Flat T-Spine (1-2 sets x 5 reps hold for 3-5 seconds)
2. Supine Bent Knee Hip Extension ( 2 sets x 5-8 reps, hold 3 seconds at top)
3. Prone Single Leg Hip Extension ( 2 sets x 5-8 reps, hold 3-5 seconds at top)
4. Wall Calf Stretch Varied Angles of Foot (2 sets, 20-30 second hold each angle)
5. Body Weight Squat Flat Footed (3 sets x 10 reps)

Figure 45.3 Strength and stretching exercises for problematic areas.
(Reprinted with permission from Winters et al. [19])



performed prior to the case, during a longer case, or after the
case is completed.
   Avoiding excessive flexion of the knees or feet helps to
mitigate strain on the lower extremities. The foot pedal
should be positioned such that the surgeon does not have to
balance on one foot to activate the instruments. Avoid
locking the knees or twisting the pelvic girdle, which in addi-
tion to causing strain on the back can also cause strain on the
leg experiencing the increased load [34, 38]. Lower extremity
stretching, specifically squats and calf stretches, can also miti-
gate lower extremity pain and fatigue [2, 19].
    Chapter 45. Ergonomic Considerations for Surgeon…      875

   Training sessions can also focus on increasing the surgeon’s
proprioception through techniques like the Alexander
method, which focuses on the relationship with the head,
neck, and spine and the individual’s awareness of the body as
a whole during each movement. This technique has been
shown to improve overall posture by participants [40].
   Participating in regular exercise at least 3 days per week
(or 5 hours per week) also directly reduces MSK pain [41].
Exercise is the only intervention that has consistently been
shown to decrease self-reported back problems [45], exam-
ples of which are included in Fig. 45.3.


Microbreaks

Microbreaks have been found to decrease surgeon discom-
fort without increasing operative time. Microbreaks are fre-
quent but quick pauses during a case. These breaks are meant
to be both mental and physical pauses, with three main goals:
stress relief, posture correction, and reduction in tissue ten-
sion [46]. The overall goal is to reduce mental and physical
fatigue through physical activities including posture
realignment and stretching. When surgeons implemented
­
short quick exercises or targeted stretching during these
breaks, they were more likely to self-report improvement not
only in pain and performance but in mental focus as well [27].
The idea is to perform these activities in a 1-min (or less)
break without disrupting sterility. The body movements are
meant to target multiple body segments and muscles at one
time, which allows for effective and efficient improvement
[46] (Fig. 45.2, Panel 2). Counterarguments against the imple-
mentation of microbreaks include concerns about increasing
operating time or disrupting workflow, although microbreaks
have not been found to increase operating time [41]. They can
also be performed during natural breaks in workflow
­including scrub tech or nurse change over, instrument count-
 ing, or other communications with operating room staff.
876   M. Scrushy and D. L. Diesen

Specialized Tools

Surgical Instruments

Due to the high volume of use, tools that allow for ideal ergo-
nomic body positioning and enforce the proper technique for
continued repetitive movements are essential. Surgical tool
handle design has been shown to affect surgeons’ upper
extremity posture and is a significant contributor to discom-
fort, muscle fatigue, and even paresthesias [21, 22].
   When looking at the root cause of discomfort, the
method of gripping the tool was found to be the most
important factor due to increased flexion and extension of
the wrist, which increases ulnar deviation. Education on the
proper gripping method of tools can reduce this hyper-
flexed positioning [22]. Laparoscopic tools are particularly
problematic as the tool activation often requires extreme
ulnar deviation and wrist flexion. This is caused by tool tips
requiring pinching the thumb and three most medial fingers
together while simultaneously rotating the tool head with
the index finger, which increases the muscle force exerted
by the surgeon in order to perform the desired movement
while actually reducing the potential forces that can be
exerted by the tool operatively [21]. Potential solutions
include designing laparoscopic tools with a pistol grip to
reduce stress on the hands and fingers. Studies implement-
ing this design found that it leads to more neutral wrist
posture and reduced hand discomfort, tremor, and fatigue
in participants [21]. Robotic instruments have also been
shown to provide better operative ergonomics by improv-
ing surgeon hand posture when compared to traditional
laparoscopic instruments [25].
   Laparoscopic tools are a “one size fits all” design. The
handles on the laparoscopic instruments, cameras, and sta-
plers are uniform and set for a size 7.5 glove size. Female
surgeons average a glove size of 6.5, as compared to their
male counterparts’ average size of 7.5 [47]. Doctors with a
larger glove size tend to describe these instruments as easy to
    Chapter 45. Ergonomic Considerations for Surgeon…      877

use, while those with a smaller glove size tend to describe
these instruments as awkward. Surgeons with a smaller glove
size are more likely to need two hands to operate a reported
“one-handed device” [47]. Other studies have found female
gender and those with smaller glove size were more likely to
report MSK symptoms related to instrument handle [48].
Given the rising number of female surgeons, this should serve
as a clarion call to develop a line of laparoscopic instruments
geared toward smaller hands.


Loupes and Headlamps

Any increased weight increases the strain on the neck due to
increased cervical loading. Loupes and headlamps must be
properly fitted to the surgeon. The two most important
aspects of fit are the working distance of the lens and the
declination angle. The design of these features contributes to
the surgeon’s line of sight during the case and, if not aligned
properly, can increase forward head positioning. The declina-
tion angle is important to decrease forward head posture.
Loupes should require less than a 20-degree downward head
tilt to avoid neck and shoulder pain [2].
    The weight of the headlamp and loupes should be consid-
ered when purchasing these items. Consider if loupes or a
headlamp is needed for each case. If a headlamp is needed,
ensure it is appropriately adjusted to allow the head to
remain in a neutral position.


Lead Shields

The weight of lead shields worn to decrease radiation expo-
sure caused discomfort in the neck, shoulder, and back
which has been reported by surgeons/residents 42% of the
time, anesthesiologists 36% of the time, and surgical nurses
49% of the time. This weight increases the axial load on the
back and lower legs and has been associated with increased
878   M. Scrushy and D. L. Diesen

MSK disorders over time. Some considerations for lead
shields include the design, the amount of radiation protec-
tion (weight), and alternatives. A two-piece wrap distributes
some weight over the hips and some weight onto the shoul-
ders which may be more comfortable than a one-piece wrap,
which distributes all of the weight over the shoulders. While
traditional lead shields are 0.5 mm in thickness, recent data
suggests lighter 0.3 mm shields provide sufficient protection.
Another alternative is to use a floor standing barrier. The
use of this barrier limits the surgeon’s ability to move, as the
surgeon must always stand behind the barrier, and is there-
fore only useful when fluoroscopy is needed for a short
period of time requiring minimal active manipulation by the
surgeon [49].


Footwear

Prolonged standing at work has been well established in
multiple professions to lead to adverse health outcomes
such as MSK pain in the lower back, lower extremities,
shoulder, and neck as well as fatigue, chronic venous insuf-
ficiency, and preterm birth [39, 50]. These symptoms are
worsened if the surgeon is wearing lead aprons. Interventions
to mitigate these outcomes have included floor mats, sit-
stand work stations, shoes, shoe inserts, foot stools, and sup-
portive hose [51]. Shoe inserts or anti-fatigue mats are well
known to be useful for decreasing lower extremity fatigue
and lower back pain in multiple professions [52, 53]. Studies
are mixed on which provides the best reduction on MSK
discomfort [53]. Compression stockings have been shown to
decrease leg swelling [51] for those who are required to
stand for long periods of time [39]. While these interven-
tions and ergonomic best practices are widely accepted in
many other fields of industry, these principles have been
largely ignored in the field of surgery.
    Chapter 45. Ergonomic Considerations for Surgeon…     879

Office Ergonomics Should Not Be Ignored

Once the surgeon leaves the operating room, a significant
amount of time is spent in the office performing administra-
tive tasks. The ergonomic setup of the surgeon’s desk is shown
in Fig. 45.4.
   Additional steps that can be considered are to contact
human resources to determine if there is an ergonomics con-
sultant available to assist in ensuring optimal workspace
ergonomics; checking/changing the position and height of the
desk; considering a standing desk with an anti-fatigue mat;
checking the height and angle of the computer monitor; con-
sidering glare protection on the computer screens; ensuring




Figure 45.4 Ergonomic computer arrangement. (Reprinted with
permission from Ronstrom et al. [54])
880    M. Scrushy and D. L. Diesen

the desk chair height relative to the floor and desk is correct
and has adequate lumbar support and arm rests; and ensuring
the keyboard and mouse shapes and heights are appropriate.


Conclusion
Attention to the working environment and use of optimal
ergonomic strategies can improve the well-being of the sur-
geon, the outcomes of patients, and the cost of healthcare.
Surgery is far behind other industries in recognizing the
impact of ergonomics. The best practices defined by other
industries should be embraced and modified for the unique
work environment of surgeons. When MSK discomfort does
occur during surgery, it should be recognized and immedi-
ately mitigated prior to causing an acute injury. This is needed
to protect surgeons, healthcare teams, patients, and the
healthcare system as a whole.


References
 1. OSHA. Secondary. https://www.osha.gov/sites/default/files/1.1_
    Data_highlights_508.pdf.
 2. Catanzarite T, Tan-Kim J, Whitcomb EL, Menefee S. Ergonomics
    in surgery: a review. Female Pelvic Med Reconstr Surg.
    2018;24(1):1–12. https://doi.org/10.1097/spv.0000000000000456.
    [published Online First: Epub Date]|.
 3. Davis WT, Fletcher SA, Guillamondegui OD. Musculoskeletal
    occupational injury among surgeons: effects for patients, provid-
    ers, and institutions. J Surg Res. 2014;189(2):207–12.e6. https://
    doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2014.03.013. [published Online First: Epub
    Date]|.
 4. Tan K, Kwek E. Musculoskeletal occupational injuries in ortho-
    paedic surgeons and residents. Malays Orthop J. 2020;14(1):24–7.
    https://doi.org/10.5704/MOJ.2003.004. [published Online First:
    Epub Date]|.
 5. Soueid A, Oudit D, Thiagarajah S, Laitung G. The pain of sur-
    gery: pain experienced by surgeons while operating. Int J Surg.
    2010;8(2):118–20. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijsu.2009.11.008. [pub-
    lished Online First: Epub Date]|.
    Chapter 45. Ergonomic Considerations for Surgeon…            881

 6. Babar-Craig H, Banfield G, Knight J. Prevalence of back
    and neck pain amongst ENT consultants: national sur-
    vey. J Laryngol Otol. 2003;117(12):979–82. https://doi.
    org/10.1258/002221503322683885. [published Online First: Epub
    Date]|.
 7. Sivak-Callcott JA, Diaz SR, Ducatman AM, Rosen CL,
    Nimbarte AD, Sedgeman JA. A survey study of occupational
    pain and injury in ophthalmic plastic surgeons. Ophthalmic
    Plast Reconstr Surg. 2011;27(1):28–32. https://doi.org/10.1097/
    IOP.0b013e3181e99cc8. [published Online First: Epub Date]|.
 8. Szeto GP, Ho P, Ting AC, Poon JT, Cheng SW, Tsang RC. Work-­
    related musculoskeletal symptoms in surgeons. J Occup Rehabil.
    2009;19(2):175–84. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10926-­0 09-­9176-­1.
    [published Online First: Epub Date]|.
 9. Esposito C, El Ghoneimi A, Yamataka A, et al. Work-related
    upper limb musculoskeletal disorders in paediatric laparoscopic
    surgery. A multicenter survey. J Pediatr Surg. 2013;48(8):1750–6.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2013.01.054. [published Online
    First: Epub Date]|.
10. Miller K, Benden M, Pickens A, Shipp E, Zheng
    Q. Ergonomics principles associated with laparoscopic sur-
    geon injury/illness. Hum Factors. 2012;54(6):1087–92. https://doi.
    org/10.1177/0018720812451046. [published Online First: Epub
    Date]|.
11. Santos-Carreras L, Hagen M, Gassert R, Bleuler H. Survey on sur-
    gical instrument handle design: ergonomics and acceptance. Surg
    Innov. 2012;19(1):50–9. https://doi.org/10.1177/1553350611413611.
    [published Online First: Epub Date]|.
12. Franasiak J, Craven R, Mosaly P, Gehrig PA. Feasibility and
    acceptance of a robotic surgery ergonomic training program.
    JSLS. 2014;18(4) https://doi.org/10.4293/JSLS.2014.00166. [pub-
    lished Online First: Epub Date]|.
13. Stucky CH, Cromwell KD, Voss RK, et al. Surgeon symptoms,
    strain, and selections: systematic review and meta-analysis of
    surgical ergonomics. Ann Med Surg (Lond). 2018;27:1–8. https://
    doi.org/10.1016/j.amsu.2017.12.013. [published Online First:
    Epub Date]|.
14. Secondary. https://cmrsurgical.com/news/one-­in-­five-­surgeons-­
    set-­to-­retire-­early-­due-­to-­physical-­toll.
15. Koshy K, Syed H, Luckiewicz A, Alsoof D, Koshy G, Harry
    L. Interventions to improve ergonomics in the operating theatre:
    a systematic review of ergonomics training and intra-operative
882      M. Scrushy and D. L. Diesen

      microbreaks. Ann Med Surg (Lond). 2020;55:135–42. https://doi.
      org/10.1016/j.amsu.2020.02.008. [published Online First: Epub
      Date]|.
16.   Lakhiani C, Fisher SM, Janhofer DE, Song DH. Ergonomics
      in microsurgery. J Surg Oncol. 2018;118(5):840–4. https://doi.
      org/10.1002/jso.25197. [published Online First: Epub Date]|.
17.   Luttmann A. Detection of muscle fatigue with electromyogra-
      phy. Wien Med Wochenschr. 1996;146(13–14):374–6.
18.   Slack PS, Coulson CJ, Ma X, Webster K, Proops DW. The
      effect of operating time on surgeons’ muscular fatigue. Ann R
      Coll Surg Engl. 2008;90(8):651–7. https://doi.org/10.1308/003588
      408x321710. [published Online First: Epub Date]|.
19.   Winters JN, Sommer NZ, Romanelli MR, Marschik C, Hulcher
      L, Cutler BJ. Stretching and strength training to improve
      postural ergonomics and endurance in the operating room.
      Plast Reconstr Surg Glob Open. 2020;8(5):e2810. https://doi.
      org/10.1097/gox.0000000000002810. [published Online First:
      Epub Date]|.
20.   Janki S, Mulder E, JNM IJ, Tran TCK. Ergonomics in the
      operating room. Surg Endosc. 2017;31(6):2457–66. https://doi.
      org/10.1007/s00464-­0 16-­5247-­5. [published Online First: Epub
      Date]|.
21.   Tung KD, Shorti RM, Downey EC, Bloswick DS, Merryweather
      AS. The effect of ergonomic laparoscopic tool handle design on
      performance and efficiency. Surg Endosc. 2015;29(9):2500–5.
      https://doi.org/10.1007/s00464-­0 14-­4005-­9. [published Online
      First: Epub Date]|.        22.       Trejo A, Jung MC, Oleynikov
      D, Hallbeck MS. Effect of handle design and target location on
      insertion and aim with a laparoscopic surgical tool. Appl Ergon.
      2007;38(6):745–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apergo.2006.12.004.
      [published Online First: Epub Date]|.
23.   Zihni AM, Ohu I, Cavallo JA, Cho S, Awad MM. Ergonomic
      analysis of robot-assisted and traditional laparoscopic proce-
      dures. Surg Endosc. 2014;28(12):3379–84. https://doi.org/10.1007/
      s00464-­0 14-­3604-­9. [published Online First: Epub Date]|.
24.   Hislop J, Tirosh O, McCormick J, Nagarajah R, Hensman
      C, Isaksson M. Muscle activation during traditional laparo-
      scopic surgery compared with robot-assisted laparoscopic sur-
      gery: a meta-analysis. Surg Endosc. 2020;34(1):31–8. https://doi.
      org/10.1007/s00464-­0 19-­07161-­7. [published Online First: Epub
      Date]|.
    Chapter 45. Ergonomic Considerations for Surgeon…              883

25. Sánchez-Margallo JA, Sánchez-Margallo FM. Initial experience
    using a robotic-driven laparoscopic needle holder with ergo-
    nomic handle: assessment of surgeons’ task performance and
    ergonomics. Int J Comput Assist Radiol Surg. 2017;12(12):2069–
    77. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11548-­0 17-­1636-­z. [published Online
    First: Epub Date]|.
26. Epstein S, Sparer EH, Tran BN, et al. Prevalence of work-­
    related musculoskeletal disorders among surgeons and
    Interventionalists: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
    JAMA Surg. 2018;153(2):e174947. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama-
    surg.2017.4947. [published Online First: Epub Date]|.
27. Hallbeck MS, Lowndes BR, Bingener J, et al. The impact of
    intraoperative microbreaks with exercises on surgeons: a multi-­
    center cohort study. Appl Ergon. 2017;60:334–41. https://doi.
    org/10.1016/j.apergo.2016.12.006. [published Online First: Epub
    Date]|.
28. Kristin Chrouser M, Fran Foley, Mitchell Goldenberg,
    Joseph Hyder, Fernando J. Kim, Jodi Maranchie, James
    M. Moore, Michelle J. Semins, CDR Sean Stroup, Glenda
    B. Wilkinson. Optimizing outcomes in urologic surgery:
    intraoperative considerations. Guidelines 2018. https://www.
    auanet.org/guidelines/optimizing-­o utcomes-­i n-­u rologic-­
    surgery-­intraoperative-­considerations.
29. McHugh MD, Kutney-Lee A, Cimiotti JP, Sloane DM, Aiken
    LH. Nurses’ widespread job dissatisfaction, burnout, and
    frustration with health benefits signal problems for patient
    ­
    care. Health Aff (Millwood). 2011;30(2):202–10. https://doi.
    org/10.1377/hlthaff.2010.0100. [published Online First: Epub
    Date]|.
30. Alqahtani SM, Alzahrani MM, Tanzer M. Adult reconstruc-
    tive surgery: a high-risk profession for work-related injuries.
    J Arthroplast. 2016;31(6):1194–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
    arth.2015.12.025. [published Online First: Epub Date]|.
31. Auerbach JD, Weidner ZD, Milby AH, Diab M, Lonner
    BS. Musculoskeletal disorders among spine surgeons: results of
    a survey of the Scoliosis Research Society membership. Spine
    (Phila Pa 1976). 2011;36(26):E1715–21. https://doi.org/10.1097/
    BRS.0b013e31821cd140. [published Online First: Epub Date]|.
32. Alzahrani MM, Alqahtani SM, Tanzer M, Hamdy
    RC. Musculoskeletal disorders among orthopedic pediatric sur-
    geons: an overlooked entity. J Child Orthop. 2016;10(5):461–6.
884      M. Scrushy and D. L. Diesen

      https://doi.org/10.1007/s11832-­0 16-­0767-­z. [published Online
      First: Epub Date]|.
33.   Lenoir C, Steinbrecher H. Ergonomics, surgeon comfort, and
      theater checklists in pediatric laparoscopy. J Laparoendosc
      Adv Surg Tech A. 2010;20(3):281–91. https://doi.org/10.1089/
      lap.2009.0226. [published Online First: Epub Date]|.
34.   van Veelen MA, Kazemier G, Koopman J, Goossens RH, Meijer
      DW. Assessment of the ergonomically optimal operating surface
      height for laparoscopic surgery. J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech A.
      2002;12(1):47–52. https://doi.org/10.1089/109264202753486920.
      [published Online First: Epub Date]|.
35.   van Det MJ, Meijerink WJ, Hoff C, Totte ER, Pierie JP. Optimal
      ergonomics for laparoscopic surgery in minimally inva-
      sive surgery suites: a review and guidelines. Surg Endosc.
      2009;23(6):1279–85. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00464-­0 08-­0 148-­x.
      [published Online First: Epub Date]|.
36.   van Det MJ, Meijerink WJ, Hoff C, Pierie JP. Interoperative
      efficiency in minimally invasive surgery suites. Surg Endosc.
      2009;23(10):2332–7. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00464-­0 09-­0335-­4.
      [published Online First: Epub Date]|.
37.   Galleano R, Carter F, Brown S, Frank T, Cuschieri A. Can arm-
      rests improve comfort and task performance in laparoscopic sur-
      gery? Ann Surg. 2006;243(3):329–33. https://doi.org/10.1097/01.
      sla.0000201481.08336.dc. [published Online First: Epub Date]|.
38.   Craven R, Franasiak J, Mosaly P, Gehrig PA. Ergonomic deficits
      in robotic gynecologic oncology surgery: a need for ­intervention.
      J Minim Invasive Gynecol. 2013;20(5):648–55. https://doi.
      org/10.1016/j.jmig.2013.04.008. [published Online First: Epub
      Date]|.
39.   Hullfish K, Trowbridge E, Bodine G. Ergonomics and
      gynecologic surgery: “surgeon protect thyself”. J Pelvic
      Med      Surg.    2009;15(6):435–9.      https://doi.org/10.1097/
      SPV.0b013e3181bb89e5. [published Online First: Epub Date]|.
40.   Reddy PP, Reddy TP, Roig-Francoli J, et al. The impact of the alex-
      ander technique on improving posture and surgical ergonomics
      during minimally invasive surgery: pilot study. J Urol. 2011;186(4
      Suppl):1658–62. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.juro.2011.04.013. [pub-
      lished Online First: Epub Date]|.
41.   Allespach H, Sussman M, Bolanos J, Atri E, Schulman
      CI. Practice longer and stronger: maximizing the physical
      well-being of surgical residents with targeted ergonomics train-
       Chapter 45. Ergonomic Considerations for Surgeon…              885

      ing. J Surg Educ. 2020;77(5):1024–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
      jsurg.2020.04.001. [published Online First: Epub Date]|.
42.   Park AE, Zahiri HR, Hallbeck MS, et al. Intraoperative
      “micro breaks” with targeted stretching enhance surgeon
      physical function and mental focus: a multicenter cohort
      study. Ann Surg. 2017;265(2):340–6. https://doi.org/10.1097/
      SLA.0000000000001665. [published Online First: Epub Date]|.
43.   Rosenblatt PL, McKinney J, Adams SR. Ergonomics in the oper-
      ating room: protecting the surgeon. J Minim Invasive Gynecol.
      2013;20(6):744. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmig.2013.07.006. [pub-
      lished Online First: Epub Date]|.
44.   Lynch SS, Thigpen CA, Mihalik JP, Prentice WE, Padua D. The
      effects of an exercise intervention on forward head and
      rounded shoulder postures in elite swimmers. Br J Sports Med.
      2010;44(5):376–81. https://doi.org/10.1136/bjsm.2009.066837.
      [published Online First: Epub Date]|.
45.   Bigos SJ, Holland J, Holland C, Webster JS, Battie M, Malmgren
      JA. High-quality controlled trials on preventing episodes of
      back problems: systematic literature review in working-age
      adults. Spine J. 2009;9(2):147–68. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
      spinee.2008.11.001. [published Online First: Epub Date]|.
46.   Coleman Wood KA, Lowndes BR, Buus RJ, Hallbeck
      MS. Evidence-based intraoperative microbreak activities for
      reducing musculoskeletal injuries in the operating room. Work.
      2018;60(4):649–59. https://doi.org/10.3233/wor-­182772. [pub-
      lished Online First: Epub Date]|.
47.   Adams DM, Fenton SJ, Schirmer BD, Mahvi DM, Horvath K,
      Nichol P. One size does not fit all: current disposable laparo-
      scopic devices do not fit the needs of female laparoscopic sur-
      geons. Surg Endosc. 2008;22(10):2310–3. https://doi.org/10.1007/
      s00464-­0 08-­9986-­9. [published Online First: Epub Date]|.
48.   Shepherd JM, Harilingam MR, Hamade A. Ergonomics in
      laparoscopic surgery – a survey of symptoms and contributing
      factors. Surg Laparosc Endosc Percutan Tech. 2016;26(1):72–7.
      https://doi.org/10.1097/SLE.0000000000000231. [published
      Online First: Epub Date]|.
49.   Dixon RG, Khiatani V, Statler JD, et al. Society of interventional
      radiology: occupational back and neck pain and the interven-
      tional radiologist. J Vasc Interv Radiol. 2017;28(2):195–9. https://
      doi.org/10.1016/j.jvir.2016.10.017. [published Online First: Epub
      Date]|.
886    M. Scrushy and D. L. Diesen

50. Waters TR, Dick RB. Evidence of health risks associated with
    prolonged standing at work and intervention effectiveness.
    Rehabil Nurs. 2015;40(3):148–65. https://doi.org/10.1002/rnj.166.
    [published Online First: Epub Date]|.
51. Kraemer WJ, Volek JS, Bush JA, et al. Influence of compres-
    sion hosiery on physiological responses to standing fatigue in
    women. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2000;32(11):1849–58. https://
    doi.org/10.1097/00005768-­200011000-­0 0006. [published Online
    First: Epub Date]|.
52. Aghazadeh J, Ghaderi M, Azghani MR, Khalkhali HR, Allahyari
    T, Mohebbi I. Anti-fatigue mats, low back pain, and electromyog-
    raphy: an interventional study. Int J Occup Med Environ Health.
    2015;28(2):347–56. https://doi.org/10.13075/ijomeh.1896.00311.
    [published Online First: Epub Date]|.
53. Speed G, Harris K, Keegel T. The effect of cushioning materials
    on musculoskeletal discomfort and fatigue during prolonged
    standing at work: a systematic review. Appl Ergon. 2018;70:300–
    14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apergo.2018.02.021. [published
    Online First: Epub Date]|.
54. Ronstrom C HS, Lowndes B, Chrouser K. Surgical ergonomics.
    In: Springer, editor. Surgeons as educators; 2017. p. 387–417.
                    Part VI
Surgical Controversies That
            Impact Quality
Chapter 46
Hernia Repair: Robot
or No Robot?
Matthew Madion and Rana M. Higgins




Introduction
The utilization of minimally invasive techniques to repair
hernias has continued to rise, and with the increasing use of
the da Vinci robotic surgical system in general surgery, new
methods have begun to emerge to repair abdominal wall her-
nias robotically. The touted benefits of utilizing the robot for
hernia repairs can be subdivided into three aspects: clinical
benefits, technical enhancement, and ergonomic improve-
ment. Clinical benefits include decreased postoperative pain,
earlier return to work, and shorter length of stay while also
maintaining the advantages of traditional laparoscopy over
open repairs, particularly with decreased wound c­ omplications.
Technically, in particular repairs, there is an added ability to
approximate fascia without conversion to an open operation
as well as an ability to perform certain myofascial dissections
not possible via simple laparoscopy and previously requiring
an open repair. Possible ergonomic benefits include greater
three-dimensional visualization, wristed instrumentation to


M. Madion · R. M. Higgins (*)
Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, USA
e-mail: mmadion@mcw.edu; rhiggins@mcw.edu

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature   889
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_46
890   M. Madion and R. M. Higgins

facilitate intracorporeal suturing, and improved surgeon
positioning.
   Clinical benefits in the literature for robotic hernia repair
thus far are limited to primarily single-institution case series,
with a handful of national database reviews, and minimal
randomized controlled trials. Despite the aforementioned
benefits, early critiques of the robotic system include the
added initial cost of the device and the continued cost of the
disposable instruments. Furthermore, the need for surgeons
to learn to use the new tool requires a learning curve, which
leads to prolonged operative times. This chapter will examine
the current published results, including discussion on utiliza-
tion techniques, outcomes, and cost of robotic inguinal and
ventral hernia repairs.


Robotic Inguinal Hernia Repair
The robotic transabdominal pre-peritoneal (rTAPP) has
been established as another minimally invasive technique to
repair inguinal hernias. Indications for rTAPP are similar to
those for laparoscopic inguinal hernia repair, including any
inguinal or femoral hernia that is symptomatic and recurrent
inguinal hernias previously repaired with an open technique.
rTAPP has been cited to be advantageous in inguinal hernias
in patients with a prior surgical history of prostatectomy or
lower pelvic surgery and large incarcerated or complicated
hernias where optimal visualization and fine dissection are
needed [1]. The touted benefits of rTAPP over a traditional
laparoscopic repair are decreased postoperative pain, likely
related to the avoidance of placing tacks during mesh
­fixation, and an improved ergonomic environment for the
 operating surgeon [2].
    Although rTAPP continues to be adopted in centers that
 have robotic capabilities, most data indicates that this is done
 with increased cost and additional drawbacks including longer
 operative times. A recent multicenter randomized controlled
         Chapter 46. Hernia Repair: Robot or No Robot?        891

study of 102 patients comparing traditional laparoscopic
TAPP to rTAPP showed that rTAPP had a median cost of
$3258 versus $1421 (p < 0.001) [2]. This difference is consistent
with prior cost-analysis studies. A Vizient database review of
3547 patients showed that robotic repairs had the highest
average cost at $9431 compared to $8837 in the open group
and $6502 in the laparoscopic group (p < 0.001) [3].Abdelmoaty
et al. reported a cost difference of $5517 in their robotic ingui-
nal repair group versus $3269 in the laparoscopic group
(p < 0.001) and with longer average in-room, skin to skin, and
recovery room times in the robotic group [4]. A single-institu-
tion retrospective review of 321 patients reported a mean
operative time of 116 min and average hospital cost of
$9993 in their robotic group versus 95 minutes and $5994 in
their laparoscopic group (p < 0.01) [5].
   In addition to higher cost and longer operative times, stud-
ies have looked at levels of frustration during robotic inguinal
hernias. The NASA Task Load Index (NASA-TLX) Scale
gauges on a scale of 1–100 the cognitive workload of a task
through five distinct categories, namely, demand, perfor-
mance, effort, frustration, and workload. Lower scores indi-
cate lower cognitive workload. In the aforementioned
randomized controlled trial by Prabhu et al., NASA-TLX
scores demonstrated significantly higher overall surgeon
reported frustration in the robotic group (32.7 versus 20.1,
p = 0.004) as well as increased effort (36.7 versus 27.4,
p = 0.05) [2].
   Despite the current high cost of rTAPP, there is a growing
body of evidence that it can be done feasibly and with com-
parable or improved clinical outcomes to laparoscopic and
open inguinal hernia repairs. A recent systematic review and
meta-analysis of 12 studies comprised of 1645 patients
showed that rTAPP had comparable postoperative urinary
retention (4.1%), seroma/hematoma (3.5%), overall compli-
cation (7.5%), and recurrence rates (0.18%) to laparoscopic
TAPP and total extraperitoneal (TEP) repairs [6].
Additionally, early results from the Prospective Hernia Study
892   M. Madion and R. M. Higgins

indicate that patients undergoing rTAPP required fewer
prescription pain medications than both open and laparo-
scopic repair groups and had a quicker return to work com-
pared to patients who underwent open inguinal repair, all
with comparable complication rates [7].
   Other studies demonstrate improved clinical outcomes in
robotic inguinal hernia repairs. The previously mentioned
Vizient national database review of 3547 patients showed
that robotic inguinal hernia repairs had the lowest overall
30-day complication rate (0.67%) compared to laparoscopic
(4.44%) and open (3.85%) (p < 0.05). With respect to 30-day
postoperative infection rates, robotic inguinal hernia repairs
had no infections, compared to 0.56% in laparoscopic repairs
and 8.33% in open repairs (p < 0.05) [8].
   Overall, utilization of robotics to repair inguinal hernias
can be performed safely and with comparable or improved
clinical outcomes to laparoscopic and open repair techniques,
but with significantly increased cost and likely initial increased
operative time that may decline with surgeon experience.
rTAPP may have a role in situations where a TEP repair is
not feasible given prior anatomic violation of the space and
the surgeon is not facile with laparoscopic TAPP. However,
the exact role of rTAPP compared to laparoscopic TAPP and
TEP has yet to be determined.


Robotic Ventral Hernia Repair
The variability and complexity of ventral hernias is reflected
in the breadth of repair techniques utilized. Among robotic
ventral hernia repairs performed, they can be distinguished
into four approaches: robotic intraperitoneal onlay mesh
(IPOM), robotic pre-peritoneal, robotic retrorectus and
transversus abdominis release (TAR), and robotic extended
total extraperitoneal (eTEP).
        Chapter 46. Hernia Repair: Robot or No Robot?      893

Robotic Intraperitoneal Onlay Mesh (rIPOM)

Intraperitoneal placement of coated mesh to cover the hernia
defect has been a popular technique to laparoscopically
repair ventral hernias, which has now also taken hold as a
popular robotic approach. When compared with open repairs,
laparoscopic repairs have been shown to have decreased
length of stay and postoperative pain, fewer surgical site
infections, but with typically longer mean operative times [9].
However, closing the fascial defect laparoscopically can be
challenging and is not consistently accomplished when under-
going a laparoscopic IPOM.
    The rIPOM offers a similar minimally invasive benefit
profile as the laparoscopic approach, with an increased ability
to re-approximate the fascia prior to placing the mesh given
the wristed instrumentation to facilitate intracorporeal sutur-
ing. Fascial closure provides the added benefit of decreasing
the incidence of postoperative seroma by compressing or
excising the hernia sac and incorporating it into the closure.
A retrospective 1:1 case-matched comparison of laparoscopic
hernia repair with transcutaneous fascial closure versus stan-
dard laparoscopic repair without fascial closure showed a
seroma difference from 27.8% in the non-closure group to
5.6% in the fascial closure group (p = 0.02) [10]. Another
review of studies comparing fascial closure versus non-­
closure in laparoscopic hernia repairs showed a range of
hernia recurrence of 4.8–16.7% in the non-closure groups
versus 0.0–5.7% in the closure groups [11]. The ease of clos-
ing the fascia is a crucial technical aspect of the robotic IPOM
and other robotic hernia repair techniques, but more studies
need to be performed to elucidate the benefit of more consis-
tent re-approximation of the fascia when placing mesh in an
onlay fashion. Additionally, although not proven in the
literature, given the circumferential fascial fixation of the
­
mesh in rIPOM, transfascial mesh fixation can be avoided,
potentially decreasing anecdotally reported post-operative
pain.
894   M. Madion and R. M. Higgins

   Most data regarding clinical outcomes in rIPOM has been
limited to single-institution studies and retrospective data.
Results have shown that rIPOM can be accomplished with
complication rates equivalent to traditional laparoscopy and
with recurrence rates similar to those previously reported for
both open and laparoscopic techniques [9, 12, 13]. A review
by the Americas Hernia Society Quality Collaborative
(AHSQC) of 631 patients comparing laparoscopic IPOM
with robotic IPOM found that laparoscopic IPOM was asso-
ciated with a higher surgical site occurrence rate (14.5%
versus 5%, p < 0.001) and increased median length of stay (1
versus 0 days, p < 0.001) with robotic IPOM having a higher
rate of fascial closures (93% versus 56%, p < 0.001) [14].
Gonzalez et al. compared a single-institution cohort of
patients undergoing robotic IPOM with fascial closure to
laparoscopic IPOM without fascial closure and found that the
robotic group trended toward decreased recurrence rate
(1.5% versus 7.5% p = 0.095 with median follow-up of
9.5 months in rIPOM and 12.1 months in laparoscopic
IPOM) and fewer complications (3% versus 10.4%, p = 0.084)
but without statistical significance [9]. A recent multicenter
review of 215 patients comparing robotic and laparoscopic
IPOM repairs showed that robotic hernia repairs were associ-
ated with comparable incidence of recurrence (7.7% versus
6.8%, p = 1.0), increased incidence of fascial closure rates
(71% versus 54%, p = 0.05), and decreased surgical site
occurrence (0.0% versus 6.8%, p < 0.01) with a propensity
score matching indicating a decreased risk of recurrence
(2.1% versus 4.2%, p < 0.01) when mean follow-up was
4.9 weeks for robotic repair and 6.0 weeks for laparoscopic
repairs [15].
   Prolonged operative time is a primary limitation of rIPOM
compared to the laparoscopic approach. Currently, most stud-
ies identify an increased operative time with rIPOM c­ ompared
to laparoscopic. Specifically, one retrospective review demon-
strated average operative times of 127 minutes in robotic
versus 67 minutes in laparoscopic (p < 0.001) [16]. Gonzalez
et al. reported mean operative time of 107.6 minutes in their
        Chapter 46. Hernia Repair: Robot or No Robot?      895

robotic group versus 87.9 minutes in their laparoscopic group
(p = 0.012) [9]. A meta-analysis calculated a 52-minute longer
operative time in robotic repairs versus laparoscopic repairs
(p = 0.04) [13]. The aforementioned AHSQC review showed
that 46% of rIPOM cases had an OR time of greater than
2 hours versus only 30% in the laparoscopic IPOM group
(p < 0.001) [14]. Walker et al.’s multicenter review of 215
patients calculated a mean case length of 116.9 minutes in the
robotic group compared to 98.7 minutes in the laparoscopic
group (p = 0.03) [15].
   Robotic IPOM offers a more feasible method of re-­
approximating the fascia prior to placing an intraperitoneal
mesh compared to the laparoscopic IPOM and, in some stud-
ies, has been shown to have lower rates of surgical site occur-
rences. Most studies show that robotic repair has a longer
operative time, which can be compensated by a shorter length
of stay. rIPOM can be considered in patients when laparo-
scopic onlay mesh placement is particularly difficult, such as
in obese patients, where transfascial suture placement and
perpendicular tack placement are more ergonomically chal-
lenging. Additionally rIPOM can be utilized to facilitate pri-
mary fascial closure, potentially decreasing the incidence of
postoperative seroma.


Robotic Pre-peritoneal Ventral Hernia Repair

Pre-peritoneal placement of mesh for ventral hernias offers
the advantage of a peritoneal covering over the mesh, there-
fore avoiding intra-abdominal mesh placement. This can
potentially reduce concerns associated with IPOM place-
ment, which includes adhesions, seroma formation, and pos-
sibly chronic pain associated with tack and transfascial suture
placement, none of which have been delineated with
significance in the literature. This peritoneal covering is
­
accomplished in a similar technique to robotic inguinal her-
nia via a transabdominal pre-peritoneal (TAPP) approach by
raising peritoneal flaps around the defect where mesh will be
896   M. Madion and R. M. Higgins

placed and subsequently suturing closed the peritoneal
defect over the mesh. Compared to onlay mesh placement,
widespread adoption of pre-peritoneal mesh placement via
traditional laparoscopy has been limited due to the technical
difficulty of dissecting the pre-peritoneal plane along the
anterior abdominal wall [17]. The robotic platform allows for
easier dissection and closure of the pre-peritoneal plane, as
well as the continued ease in closure of the fascial defect, as
previously discussed with the rIPOM technique.
   Pre-peritoneal repair of ventral hernias has been shown to
be a feasible and safe approach and, when compared to
robotic IPOM techniques, has not added significant operating
time in certain single-institution studies—one retrospective
review showed an average operative time of 167 minutes for
rIPOM versus 158 minutes for pre-peritoneal repair (p = 0.57)
[17]. In a single-institution comparison of different robotic
hernia repair techniques for primary ventral hernias, pre-­
peritoneal mesh placement compared to rIPOM had a lower
rate of minor complications (2.8% versus 12.2%, p = 0.028)
and offered a higher mesh to defect overlap ratio compared
to rIPOM [18]. Furthermore, intraperitoneal placed mesh was
a risk factor for any grade of Clavien-Dindo postoperative
complication [18]. As in rIPOM, approximation of fascial
defects can be more consistently accomplished robotically
compared with laparoscopy alone while also continuing to
have the added benefit of less wound complications and pain
that the laparoscopic techniques offer over an open repair
technique. In the largest single surgeon series of robotic pre-­
peritoneal ventral hernia repair, the fascia was closed in all 54
patients and with only two post-operative complications, a
seroma and a rectus sheath hematoma [19].
   Robotic pre-peritoneal hernia repairs can be accomplished
with a similar side effect profile to previously discussed
rIPOM, with a potentially added benefit of placing mesh in a
space that is isolated from the visceral contents. A robotic
pre-peritoneal hernia repair may be advantageous in similar
patients that would benefit from a rIPOM, such as in obese
patients, a demographic at high risk for wound complications
         Chapter 46. Hernia Repair: Robot or No Robot?       897

and in whom even laparoscopic surgery can be ergonomically
challenging. As in rIPOM, fascial defect closure is more fea-
sible than in laparoscopic ventral hernia repair. A pre-­
peritoneal repair could be attempted over robotic IPOM if a
pre-peritoneal dissection if feasible to avoid intraperitoneal
mesh placement.


 obotic Retrorectus and Transversus Abdominus
R
Release (TAR)
The most ideal use of robotics techniques in ventral hernia
repairs is to accomplish successful and durable repairs in
patients that would have previously required an open repair.
Due to the technical difficulty of a traditional laparoscopic
repair, retromuscular dissections with transversus abdominis
release (TAR) have been mostly limited to open approaches.
However, given the increased range of motion of the robotic
instruments, these dissections can be more easily accom-
plished robotically compared to laparoscopically.
Retromuscular dissections with TAR offer the added benefit
of bringing fascial edges back to their normal anatomic posi-
tion in hernias whose defects would otherwise not be able to
be approximated due to tension or defect size. Furthermore,
in similar fashion to the previously described pre-peritoneal
technique, mesh is placed in a retromuscular/pre-peritoneal
position, thus preventing intraperitoneal mesh placement.
   Robotic TAR (rTAR) is a relatively new technique, so data
has been mostly limited to single-institution series and retro-
spective series but shows promise in its ability to significantly
reduce length of stay but typically with longer operative times
compared to open TAR repairs. A recent analysis from the
Americas Hernias Society Quality Collaborative comparing
propensity matched open and robotic retrorectus hernia
repairs demonstrated that robotic repairs had a significantly
decreased length of stay compared to open repairs (2 days
versus 3 days, p < 0.001) without any differences in intraopera-
tive complications, surgical site infections, reoperation, or
898   M. Madion and R. M. Higgins

readmissions, but with longer overall operative times [20]. A
double institution case-matched review of a total of 114
patients showed a decreased length of stay of 1.3 days in the
rTAR group versus 6.0 days in the open group (p < 0.001),
however with prolonged operative times of 299 minutes in the
rTAR versus 211 minutes in the open group (p < 0.001) [21].
Another single-institution retrospective review of 102 patients
also demonstrated a decreased length of stay of 3.8 days in the
rTAR group versus 7.1 days in the open group (p < 0.01), but
also with prolonged operative times of 365 minutes versus
287 minutes (p < 0.01) [22]. Overall, although there is an
increased operative time to complete a rTAR compared to an
open TAR, surgeon learning curve must be considered given
the advanced nature of this case. Additionally, costs incurred
from prolonged operative time can theoretically be compen-
sated through a significantly decreased length of stay when
compared to open repairs.
   Although data is new and evolving, the robotic retrorectus
repair with TAR offers the most promising current use for
robotics in repairing ventral hernias in a cost-effective and
clinically effective method. It can be performed in place of
open repairs while having comparable clinical results and
decreased length of stay while also maintaining the technical
benefits over traditional laparoscopy including extraperito-
neal mesh placement, fascial defect closure, and avoidance of
transfascial sutures. However, retrorectus repair with possible
TAR is a technically challenging operation and should only
be attempted robotically by surgeons who have significant
experience with both complex open hernia repairs and
robotics.


 obotic Extended (or Enhanced-View) Total
R
Extraperitoneal Ventral Hernia Repair (eTEP)
Robotic eTEP ventral hernia repair utilizes the technical
principles initially described and currently widely utilized in
TEP inguinal hernia repairs. Access to the pre-peritoneal or
retrorectus space is gained via direct cutdown or optical
         Chapter 46. Hernia Repair: Robot or No Robot?       899

trocar, and repair is accomplished without accessing the intra-
peritoneal space. After access, the surgical dissection and
hernia repairs in the total extraperitoneal space can utilize
aforementioned techniques of both the pre-peritoneal and
retrorectus with TAR including defect closure, extraperito-
neal mesh placement, and component separation. Additional
benefits of robotic eTEP include complete exclusion of mesh
from the peritoneal cavity without the requirement of closing
the peritoneum or posterior sheath as is required in the other
techniques that avoid mesh exposure to visceral contents.
Robotic eTEPs have been adopted by some institutions that
are previously adept in performing laparoscopic eTEP for
ventral hernias, and their data has mostly been limited to
retrospective institutional reports. Lu et al. reviewed 206
patients undergoing robotic versus laparoscopic eTEP and
showed longer average operative times of 174 minutes in the
robotic eTEP versus 120 minutes in the laparoscopic group
(p < 0.05) and comparable recurrence rates of 1.2% in the
robotic group versus 1.7% in the laparoscopic group
(p = 0.771) at an average follow-up of 5.5 months [23].
Belyansky et al. looked at 37 patients who underwent robotic
eTEP and had no intraoperative complications, two seromas
with one requiring drainage, and one readmission for poor
oral intake. There were no recurrences when mean follow-up
was 36 days [24]. Overall robotic eTEP is a hernia repair tech-
nique that has not yet been fully established in the surgical
community but offers yet another repair option that may find
a footing as robotic hernia repairs become more widely
adopted.


Cost of Robotic Ventral Hernia Repair

The challenge of analyzing costs related to robotic ventral
hernia repairs is that choosing the correct comparison control
group is difficult. A single-institution review of robotic versus
laparoscopic ventral hernia repairs has shown similar direct
hospital costs between the two groups, specifically $13,943 in
the laparoscopic group versus $19,532 in the robotic group
900   M. Madion and R. M. Higgins

(p = 0.07) with a decreased length of stay in the robotic group
(1 day versus 2 days, p = 0.004) [25]. However, a systematic
review of the literature and meta-analysis showed generally
increased overall costs [13]. Most recently, a multicenter,
blinded randomized control trial of robotic versus laparo-
scopic IPOM technique showed increased overall costs at
90 days of $15,865 in the robotic group versus $12,955 in the
laparoscopic group (p = 0.004) [26]. Many comparisons are
made between traditional laparoscopic hernia repairs; how-
ever, robotics offers a tool that may be able to successfully
repair more complex hernias that would have previously
been repaired in an open technique, thus offering the added
benefit of decreased surgical site occurrences and decreased
length of stay, both of which contribute to cost [13]. Overall,
analysis of robotic ventral hernias continues to show a higher
overall cost compared to a traditional laparoscopic repair,
with that additional cost being slightly lower in centers that
perform high-volume robotic surgeries [16, 27].
   Recent reviews have concluded that it may be possible to
achieve reduced costs; however that has not yet been consis-
tently displayed in the literature [28]. Cost offset of robotic
ventral hernia repairs can be accomplished in several ways
including efficient robotic instrument utilization, decreased
operative time, and reducing mesh costs. Utilization of a
simple uncoated pre-peritoneal mesh can potentially reduce
the overall material cost compared to a coated intraperito-
neal mesh. Pursuing use of a robotic ventral hernia repair in
cases where length of stay could be significantly reduced, as
has been shown in robotic TARs, avoids the additional hospi-
tal costs of overnight stays.


Ergonomics of Robotic Hernia Repairs
One of the touted benefits of the da Vinci robotic surgical
system over traditional laparoscopy has been the improved
ergonomics in sitting at a console and being able to work with
improved posture, wristed instrumentation, and
        Chapter 46. Hernia Repair: Robot or No Robot?      901

three-­dimensional visualization. Anecdotally, many surgeons
report improved comfort while operating on the console;
however, little objective data has been found to display
improved ergonomics, particularly to a degree that improves
outcomes or surgeon performance. Some of the lack of clarity
on ergonomics may be due to the possibility that like operat-
ing, managing the ergonomics on the console also takes expe-
rience to master. A survey of 289 gynecologic oncology
surgeons showed that of surgeons who performed more than
200 robotic cases per year, 34% reported symptoms including
finger, neck, back, shoulder, wrist, and eye discomfort versus
60% in those performing 50 or fewer cases per year [29].
   Ergonomics in robotic surgery has been examined using
the Rapid Upper Limb Assessment (RULA), which is a tool
that assesses posture and movements of the neck, upper back,
and upper limbs to identify motions that may put the subject
at risk for injury [30]. The RULA score was used to examine
surgeons during the only randomized controlled trial com-
paring laparoscopic and robotic TAPP inguinal hernias and
showed no differences in overall scores. Specifically, when
examining the grand composite score, which includes posture,
upper arms, and wrists on each side of the body, the mean left
and right grand composite scores for laparoscopic were 9.8
and 10.1 compared to 10.3 and 10.2 robotic (p = 0.31 and
p = 0.94), demonstrating no difference in ergonomics between
laparoscopic and robotic inguinal hernia repair [2]. Data on
ergonomic benefits in robotic cases with longer operative
times, more complex dissection, and obese patients is limited
in the literature. More evidence and studies on the ergonomic
benefits in robotics are warranted.


Conclusion
The use of minimally invasive techniques to repair inguinal
and ventral hernias will continue to rise. The use of the da
Vinci robotic surgical system to repair inguinal hernias can
achieve clinical results similar to traditional laparoscopy but
902   M. Madion and R. M. Higgins

with additional cost and operative time. A robotic inguinal
hernia repair can be considered in situations where a laparo-
scopic transabdominal pre-peritoneal approach is necessary
but prior surgeon experience with laparoscopic TAPP is lim-
ited. Robotic ventral hernia repair offers a wide variety of
repair techniques, many of which have been previously
accomplished via traditional laparoscopy. However the
robotic equivalent techniques can typically accomplish
increased fascial closure rates and avoiding transfascial
sutures. More research need to be conducted on the clinical
benefits of increased fascial closure rates, but some studies
point to a possible reduction in recurrence rates. Currently,
the most promising use of the robot in ventral hernias is with
retrorectus and transversus abdominis release wherein the
traditional laparoscopic repair is not achievable; therefore
the clinical benefits of reduced wound morbidity, decreased
postoperative pain, and reduced length-of-stay compared to
the open technique are obtainable. Cost-effective practices in
robotic hernia repairs have generally not been able to reach
costs that compete with traditional laparoscopy or open-­
repair techniques; however cost savings can occur if robotic
repair techniques are chosen in situations that utilize cheaper
non-coated mesh while reducing length of stay. Although
touted and anecdotally reported as having an ergonomic ben-
efit compared to traditional laparoscopy, more studies are
required to examine the true ergonomic benefits in utilizing
the da Vinci robotic surgical system.


References
1. Podolsky D, Novitsky Y. Robotic inguinal hernia repair. Surg
   Clin N Am. 2020;100:409–15.
2. Prabhu AS, Carbonell A, Hope W, Warren J, Higgins R, Jacob B,
   Blatnik J, Haskins I, Alkhatib H, Tastaldi L, Fafaj A, Tu C, Rosen
   MJ. Robotic inguinal vs transabdominal laparoscopic inguinal
   hernia repair: the RIVAL randomized clinical trial. JAMA Surg.
   2020;155:380.
         Chapter 46. Hernia Repair: Robot or No Robot?           903

 3. Pokala B, Armijo PR, Flores L, Hennings D, Oleynikov
    D. Minimally invasive inguinal hernia repair is superior to open:
    a national database review. Hernia. 2019;23:593–9.
 4. Abdelmoaty WF, Dunst CM, Neighorn C, Swanstrom LL,
    Hammill CW. Robotic-assisted versus laparoscopic unilateral
    inguinal hernia repair: a comprehensive cost analysis. Surg
    Endosc. 2019;33:3436–43.
 5. Khoraki J, Gomez PP, Mazzini GS, Pessoa BM, Browning MG,
    Aquilina GR, Salluzzo JL, Wolfe LG, Campos GM. Perioperative
    outcomes and cost of robotic-assisted versus laparoscopic ingui-
    nal hernia repair. Surg Endosc. 2020;34:3496–507.
 6. Aiolfi A, Cavalli M, Micheletto G, Bruni PG, Lombardo F, Perali
    C, Bonitta G, Bona D. Robotic inguinal hernia repair: is technol-
    ogy taking over? Systematic review and meta-analysis. Hernia.
    2019;23:509–19.
 7. The Prospective Hernia Study Group, LeBlanc K, Dickens
    E, Gonzalez A, Gamagami R, Pierce R, Balentine C, Voeller
    G. Prospective, multicenter, pairwise analysis of robotic-assisted
    inguinal hernia repair with open and laparoscopic inguinal
    hernia repair: early results from the Prospective Hernia Study.
    Hernia. 2020;
 8. Pokala B, Armijo PR, Flores L, Hennings D, Oleynikov
    D. Minimally invasive inguinal hernia repair is superior to open:
    a national database review. Hernia. 2019;23:593–9.
 9. Gonzalez A, Escobar E, Romero R, Walker G, Mejias J, Gallas
    M, Dickens E, Johnson CJ, Rabaza J, Kudsi OY. Robotic-assisted
    ventral hernia repair: a multicenter evaluation of clinical out-
    comes. Surg Endosc. 2017;31:1342–9.
10. Clapp ML, Hicks SC, Awad SS, Liang MK. Trans-cutaneous
    closure of central defects (TCCD) in laparoscopic ventral hernia
    repairs (LVHR). World J Surg. 2013;37:42–51.
11. Nguyen DH, Nguyen MT, Askenasy EP, Kao LS, Liang
    MK. Primary fascial closure with laparoscopic ventral hernia
    repair: systematic review. World J Surg. 2014;38:3097–104.
12. Fuenmayor P, Lujan HJ, Plasencia G, Karmaker A, Mata W,
    Vecin N. Robotic-assisted ventral and incisional hernia repair
    with hernia defect closure and intraperitoneal onlay mesh
    (IPOM) experience. J Robotic Surg. 2020;14(5):695–701.
13. Henriksen NA, Jensen KK, Muysoms F. Robot-assisted abdomi-
    nal wall surgery: a systematic review of the literature and meta-­
    analysis. Hernia. 2019;23:17–27.
904    M. Madion and R. M. Higgins

14. Prabhu AS, Dickens EO, Copper CM, Mann JW, Yunis JP,
    Phillips S, Huang L-C, Poulose BK, Rosen MJ. Laparoscopic
    vs robotic intraperitoneal mesh repair for incisional hernia: an
    Americas Hernia Society Quality Collaborative Analysis. J Am
    Coll Surg. 2017;225:285–93.
15. Walker PA, May AC, Mo J, Cherla DV, Santillan MR, Kim S,
    Ryan H, Shah SK, Wilson EB, Tsuda S. Multicenter review of
    robotic versus laparoscopic ventral hernia repair: is there a role
    for robotics? Surg Endosc. 2018;32:1901–5.
16. Zayan NE, Meara MP, Schwartz JS, Narula VK. A direct
    comparison of robotic and laparoscopic hernia repair: patient-­
    reported outcomes and cost analysis. Hernia. 2019;23:1115–21.
17. Kennedy M, Barrera K, Akelik A, Constable Y, Smith M,
    Chung P, Sugiyama G. Robotic TAPP ventral hernia repair:
    early lessons learned at an inner city safety net hospital. JSLS.
    2018;22:e2017.00070.
18. Kudsi OY, Gokcal F. Lateral approach totally extraperitoneal
    (TEP) robotic retromuscular ventral hernia repair. Hernia.
    2021;25(1):211–22.
19. Orthopoulos G, Kudsi OY. Feasibility of robotic-assisted transab-
    dominal preperitoneal ventral hernia repair. J Laparoendoscop
    Adv Surg Tech. 2018;28:434–8.
20. Carbonell AM, Warren JA, Prabhu AS, Ballecer CD, Janczyk
    RJ, Herrera J, Huang L-C, Phillips S, Rosen MJ, Poulose
    BK. Reducing length of stay using a robotic-assisted approach
    for retromuscular ventral hernia repair: a comparative analysis
    from the Americas Hernia Society Quality Collaborative. Ann
    Surg. 2018;267:210–7.
21. Martin-del-Campo LA, Weltz AS, Belyansky I, Novitsky
    YW. Comparative analysis of perioperative outcomes of robotic
    versus open transversus abdominis release. Surg Endosc.
    2018;32:840–5.
22. Bittner JG, Alrefai S, Vy M, Mabe M, Del Prado PAR,
    Clingempeel NL. Comparative analysis of open and robotic
    transversus abdominis release for ventral hernia repair. Surg
    Endosc. 2018;32:727–34.
23. Lu R, Addo A, Ewart Z, Broda A, Parlacoski S, Zahiri HR,
    Belyansky I. Comparative review of outcomes: laparoscopic and
    robotic enhanced-view totally extraperitoneal (eTEP) access
    retrorectus repairs. Surg Endosc. 2020;34:3597–605.
24. Belyansky I, Reza Zahiri H, Sanford Z, Weltz AS, Park A. Early
    operative outcomes of endoscopic (eTEP access) robotic-­
            Chapter 46. Hernia Repair: Robot or No Robot?            905

      assisted retromuscular abdominal wall hernia repair. Hernia.
      2018;22:837–47.
25.   Warren JA, Cobb WS, Ewing JA, Carbonell AM. Standard lapa-
      roscopic versus robotic retromuscular ventral hernia repair. Surg
      Endosc. 2017;31:324–32.
26.   Olavarria OA, Bernardi K, Shah SK, Wilson TD, Wei S, Pedroza
      C, Avritscher EB, Loor MM, Ko TC, Kao LS, Liang MK. Robotic
      versus laparoscopic ventral hernia repair: multicenter, blinded
      randomized controlled trial. BMJ. 2020;370:m2457.
27.   Khorgami Z, Li WT, Jackson TN, Howard CA, Sclabas GM. The
      cost of robotics: an analysis of the added costs of robotic-assisted
      versus laparoscopic surgery using the National Inpatient Sample.
      Surg Endosc. 2019;33:2217–21.
28.   Nikolian VC, Coleman NL, Podolsky D, Novitsky YW. Robotic-­
      assisted transabdominal preperitoneal ventral hernia repair.
      Surg Technol Int. 2020;36:95–7.
29.   Lee MR, Lee GI. Does a robotic surgery approach offer optimal
      ergonomics to gynecologic surgeons?: a comprehensive ergo-
      nomics survey study in gynecologic robotic surgery. J Gynecol
      Oncol. 2017;28:e70.
30.   McAtamney L, Nigel CE. RULA: a survey method for the
      investigation of work-related upper limb disorders. Appl Ergon.
      1993;24(2):91–9.
Chapter 47
The Consistent Operating
Room Team
Leena Khaitan and Joseph Youssef




Objectives
1. What are the measurable impacts of team consistency?
2. What are the pros and cons of team consistency vs cross-­
   trained teams?


Introduction
A team is defined as a group of people who perform interde-
pendent tasks to achieve a common objective. In healthcare,
there are many types of teams. For example, they can vary
from teams whose members work together often and are
highly specialized, such as a team in a cardiac catheterization
suite, to teams who sporadically come together for temporary
measures, such as the stroke or trauma team. In the operating
room, a typical team includes anesthesiologists and/or nurse
anesthetists, surgeons, residents, nurses, physician assistants,
and technicians.

L. Khaitan (*) · J. Youssef
University Hospitals, Department of Surgery, Cleveland, OH, USA
e-mail: leena.khaitan@uhhospitals.org;
joseph.youssef@uhhospitals.org

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature   907
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_47
908   L. Khaitan and J. Youssef

   Several studies have shown that team training in the oper-
ating room can improve efficiency and improve the culture of
patient safety [1]. It is evident in this era of healthcare that
teams need to be optimized to deliver the best performance
in accomplishing care. To achieve optimization, emphasis has
been placed on teamwork through effective communication
between those team members and a culture of safety. Teams
are structured within this paradigm and objectives can be met
utilizing different formats. In this chapter, the importance and
impact of team training and team interaction in the operating
room environment will be reviewed. Methodologies to
achieve these goals will also be discussed.


Types of Teams

Cross-Trained Team

One emerging team structure is the cross-trained team. There
are several definitions for what a cross-trained team is—one
of which is some or every team member has been trained to
perform other job functions than their primary designated
function. For example, a scrub technician may help transport
the patient, or a post-anesthesia care unit (PACU) nurse may
rotate into the operating room and assist the circulating
nurse. Another definition, which will be the primary focus of
this chapter, is that team members are trained to perform
their respective duties in a wide variety of procedures and
circumstances. In essence, each team member becomes a
“Jack of all trades, master of none.” An example of this is a
scrub technician or a physician assistant who has been trained
for a wide variety of specialty cases, such as a member of the
orthopedic team assisting in a bariatric case.
   Cross-trained teams are not a new phenomenon but rather
something that has been advocated by other industries as
well as sports and the military. For example, in sports, by mix-
ing different exercises for players, coaches can prevent
       Chapter 47.   The Consistent Operating Room Team         909

overuse injuries, balance development, and avoid monotony.
In the military, operational success is dependent on each
team member’s understanding of each other’s roles and tasks.
This is primarily to ensure that if one member is unable to
continue, others can replace them and accomplish the mission
at hand. In industry, cross-trained teams of employees help
increase productivity and mitigate risk and inefficiency.
    Team members involved in cross-training programs
become proficient at tasks outside the usual limitations of
their job. Hence, they can anticipate and help with the needs
of other team members. For their employers, this also pro-
vides more flexibility. It makes it easier for employers to
seamlessly fill in certain employees for a variety of tasks. By
ensuring that team members are trained for multiple roles, it
is easier to respond to and troubleshoot problems and miti-
gate disasters.
    By providing scheduling flexibility, cross-trained team
members are better suited to meeting varied operating room
demands. For example, in Geisinger Health System in
Pennsylvania, two centers with different team paradigms
were set up to deal with thrombectomies for stroke patients.
Center A utilized a cross-trained team that was trained in
both operating and neuroendovascular procedures, while
Center B maintained a dedicated on-call neuroendovascular
team. When comparing the effectiveness of both teams, suc-
cessful reperfusion was achieved in 98% and 97% of cases in
Centers A and B, respectively (p = 0.79), but door-to-­puncture
time differed significantly between 50 minutes in center A
compared to 121 minutes in center B (58% reduction,
p < 0.02) [2]. This is due to Center A relying on in-house staff
members that are trained to fit in different roles whenever it
is asked of them. Center B relied on a highly trained
­specialty-­specific team. These teams are more experienced in
 their specific specialties but logistically require more time to
 mobilize.
    Cross-trained teams can be more economical as members
 of the staff can fill different functions. Larger institutions with
910   L. Khaitan and J. Youssef

more financial resources are more adept at having multiple
specialty-specific teams. The smaller surgical department,
however, may only have a limited number of staff members.
Thus, cross-training those few staff members becomes imper-
ative to handle the wide variety of procedures that need to be
performed.


Consistent Teams

On the other end of the spectrum of team models is a para-
digm of consistency in team members and their functions, i.e.,
each member is tasked with certain functions that do not
change. This type of team has been espoused by other fields
as well. In sports, it is equivalent to special teams on an NFL
professional team or the special tactical unit in the police
force or military. For these teams, there are clear expectations
for each team member’s functions, responsibilities, and
accountabilities. This helps to optimize the team’s efficiency
toward a concentrated goal. In the setting of an operating
room, these teams are typically trained toward a particular
surgery or set of surgeries and spend the majority of their
time performing these procedures. Members of the team
would function in their primary designated function but
would work as such in a dedicated subspecialty.
   Consistent teams affect multiple factors when it comes to
the operating room. Communication, for example, is more
effective in teams that have worked together longer and have
familiarity with each other. This, in turn, causes increased
efficiencies, as demonstrated by one study, in which there was
an average of 5.1% time gain per similar case performed
within the same day with the same team. This consistency
builds trust among team members; thus, individual team
members can rely on dependable working conditions, know-
ing the reliability and acumen of each team member through
experience and consistent feedback [3]. The effects of this
consistency can outlast just same-day similar surgeries. In
another study, which examined 754 cases of bilateral reduction
      Chapter 47.   The Consistent Operating Room Team     911

mammoplasty procedures over 12 years, there was a reduc-
tion of 16 minutes of operative time as the team members
became familiarized with one another [4].
   As surgical departments try to rein in spending and cut
costs, they must find the optimal level of efficiency to take
advantage of their infrastructure, equipment, and team setup.
In one study, it was demonstrated that it is possible to
increase operating room efficiency by changing the patient
flow from patients linearly moving through their operative
day to one of parallel processing. In this model, the team
members are effectively able to work on two patients simul-
taneously. To achieve this, each member had a well-defined
role, and the team acted as a unit. Therefore, by mandating
consistent teams, there was a reduction of overall costs per
case [5]. To achieve this model, additional personnel may be
needed. However, cost-effectiveness analysis suggests that
the additional costs incurred by higher staffing ratios are
likely to be offset by increases in throughput [6]. To increase
efficiency utilizing this team model, it is important to have a
high volume of surgery. The more surgeries performed, the
more opportunity teams have to work together and thus con-
tribute to the team’s overall effectiveness.


Factors Affected by Team Format

Communication

The concept of a culture of safety has been featured promi-
nently in the literature on quality and outcomes. At the heart
of the culture for safety is effective communication between
team members. Operating room safety does not just happen
organically, but rather it is largely a result of the behaviors
and attitudes of the involved individuals and how well they
communicate [7]. In the operating room, communicative
events were found to be clustered around certain phases:
patient preparation, the start of the procedure, moments
912    L. Khaitan and J. Youssef

 where surgery is difficult, the conclusion of the procedure,
 and patient hand-off [8].
    Team dynamics play a large role in how effective commu-
 nication is. Team members’ familiarity with one another and
 comfort level in addressing each other play a significant role
 in how effective the team is in maintaining the appropriate
 culture and addressing common concerns that arise in the
 operating room (Table 47.1). The consistent team members
 are aware of the equipment needed for the procedure and
 how to prepare the patient. They can get the patient on the
 table and have the room appropriately ready faster than their
 counterparts on cross-trained teams [9]. Thus, at least in the
 phases of communicative clusters, at the beginning and end of
 cases, it is more optimal to have a consistent team. The
 authors also made this observation when looking at the
 importance of team consistency in their own experience. They
 also noted that with consistent teams, the setup time and time
 after surgery out of the operating room were shorter with a
 consistent team [16].
    Additionally, team members of a consistent team are more
likely to know the goal of the operation and the procedure
steps as compared to members of a cross-trained team [10].
This will give them more confidence in speaking up on safety
issues as well as bring up concerns regarding steps in the
­procedure as they become more familiarized with the proce-
 dure [11].


Table 47.1 Common concerns in the operating room
Coordinating patient preparedness (room readiness,
cancellation)
Resources (locating correct equipment, troubleshooting
equipment)
Staffing (assign particular staff to cases, coordinating coverage
during breaks)
Safety (timeout, operating room fire, instrument counts)
      Chapter 47.   The Consistent Operating Room Team       913

Error Reduction

In the operating room, situations can arise in which the team
has to act quickly and decisively in response to changing con-
ditions. This has to be achieved without necessarily being able
to halt surgery to discuss the best plan of action. To be suc-
cessful in the operating room, teams need to intuitively know
what to do and how to do it together efficiently. To do this,
they need a good shared mental model. A shared mental
model is a “knowledge structure held by each member of a
team that enables them to form accurate explanations and
expectations…and in turn, to coordinate their actions and
adapt their behavior to demands of the task and other team
members” [12].
   A shared mental model is the notion of being on the “same
page.” Team members who are part of consistent teams will,
over time, develop a shared mental model through repetition
of the procedure. This, in turn, allows for error reduction and
the ability to meet challenges as they arise. This can be attrib-
uted to team members identifying errors or potential errors
due to previous encounters of similar problems or due to
knowing the capabilities and shortcomings of the team mem-
bers at hand [13].
   In one study, questionnaires were given to surgical teams
performing video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery to assess
their shared mental model [14]. The questions addressed
three overall topics, namely, (1) risk assessment of the proce-
dure, (2) familiarity with team members/perception of those
team members’ skills, and (3) recognition of challenges aris-
ing during the operation for different team members. As
noted in Fig. 47.1, the team member who was most familiar
with the team and who team members, in turn, felt most
familiar with was the surgeon. This has important ramifica-
tions regarding leadership and guidance of the procedure to
a resolution safely. More importantly though were the final
results of the questionnaire: it noted that only one-third of
perceived problems were identified by other team members,
as outlined in Table 47.2.
914    L. Khaitan and J. Youssef

   The data suggests that despite some level of familiarity,
perceptions of other team members’ challenges may not be
recognized by other team members. This study also suggests
that as teams become more familiar, they demonstrate a
greater degree of concordance for each other’s perceived skill
levels as well as recognizing other member’s challenges.
Furthermore, this mutual understanding also improves adap-
tive coordination within teams which is essential for overall
performance. As teams became more consistent, there was an
improvement in recognizing challenges. For cross-trained
teams, it is important to have explicit coordination strategies
to obtain shared mental models that can help compensate for
lack of familiarity [15].
   It is also important to note that consistent teams may also
have limitations. Team members who have the same mental

                                   Surgeon




Anesthesiologist                                         Assistant
                                                         surgeon




    Nurse                                                  Scrub
  anesthetist                                              nurse




                                    Floor
                                    nurse

Figure 47.1 Familiarity within the team. Each arrow represents the
mean familiarity of one team member toward another team mem-
ber; darker and thicker arrows represent higher familiarity.
(Reproduced from Gjeraa et al. [14])
       Chapter 47.    The Consistent Operating Room Team     915

Table 47.2 Team members’ awareness of other team members’
challenges or problems, as percentage of self-identified problems
and challenges
                 Problems of                           Team
Awareness of                                           member’s
challenges/                                            awareness
problems         Surgeon AS SN FN Anesth NA (average)
Surgeon          …        44 22 27 65            60 44
Assistant        48        …    0    27   58    50   37
surgeon
Scrub nurse      27        47   …    27   49    35   37
Floor nurse      24        44   25   …    17    15   25
Anesthesiologist 35        31   33   40   …     32   34
Nurse            27        31   22   30   47    …    32
anesthetist
Rest of team     32        39   21   30   47    38   35
(average)
Reproduced from Gjeraa et al. [14]
Anesth anesthesiologist, AS assistant surgeon, FN floor nurse, NA
nurse anesthetist, SN scrub nurse

model may also hinder the goal of the team through “group
think.” This term refers to a situation in which team members
all have a consensus of a mental model, but the mental model
is incorrect. Also, familiar teams are less innovative when
faced with new problems. This is an area where cross-trained
team members may be more advantageous. They can provide
a different lens by which the challenge can be met and can
bring experience from other specialties to use in dealing with
the procedure at hand.
    Team members possessing a common understanding of the
case at hand, including its major steps and points at which
challenges are most likely to be encountered, do better than
teams that do not. However, one way to mitigate this is
through creating specialty-specific preoperative briefings
[16]. This will help decrease surgical flow disruptions as well
as improve patient safety [17].
916   L. Khaitan and J. Youssef

OR Efficiency

 The operating room is a complex dynamic work environment.
 It requires multiple professionals to interact with each other
 as well as with complicated technologies seamlessly. This
 must be done with safe and effective patient care as the pri-
 mary goal, but it is also important for it to be efficient. As
 discussed earlier, in large hospital settings, it is common that
 during the day, personnel are utilized across many different
 ORs and different types of surgeries. Although the staff mem-
 bers may be adequately prepared for some of these surgeries
 through prior experience, it is possible that some members
 will not be familiar with the procedures or surgeon at all. For
 staff who have been part of the team during previous surger-
 ies, it is also possible for them to require a period of familiar-
 ization time at the beginning of the surgical procedure or
 during it. This can form an obstacle for smooth workflow and
 reduce efficiency.
    In one study in the Netherlands, scheduling similar con-
 secutive cases and performing them with a consistent team
 resulted in faster case time and lower turnover and prepara-
 tion time. The study focused on two procedures: an open
 inguinal hernia repair and a laparoscopic cholecystectomy.
 The procedure time of the inguinal hernia repair decreased
 significantly and had practical scheduling implications.
 Surgeons were able to increase the number of cases they per-
 form per day due to an increase in efficiency. For the more
 complex operation, laparoscopic cholecystectomy, there was
 no significant effect on procedure time, but there was a
 decrease in turnover time [18].
    In our institution, we observed similar results. Operating
room data was obtained for 180 cases of laparoscopic
­Roux-­en-­Y bypasses performed at two hospitals. One hospi-
 tal had a highly consistent operating room team (eight circu-
 lating and scrub nurses, four anesthetists, three
 anesthesiologists), and the other had much greater variability
 of staff (39 circulating nurses, 57 scrub nurses/technicians, 59
 anesthetists or anesthesia residents, 24 anesthesiologists).
      Chapter 47.   The Consistent Operating Room Team     917

There was no statistical difference between the total mean
OR time. However, the preparation and turnover time for
cases were shorter in the hospital with a consistent operating
room team [19].


Training
Multiple modalities exist for training, including on-the-job
training, apprenticeship, as well as simulation models. On-the-­
job training is an explicit type of training where team mem-
bers are instructed via targeted information and observed as
they perform their duties. This is followed up by feedback
based on observed performance. An example of this is when
a new surgical assistant is placed with the surgeon, and
instructions with feedback are continuously given throughout
the operation. In an apprenticeship model, new team mem-
bers are paired with coworkers who have more experience.
The older team members mentor and advise on how to suc-
ceed in that particular team role. The newer team members
observe, learn, and assimilate the different responsibilities of
their role. For example, a new scrub technician may shadow a
more experienced scrub technician to learn the steps and
responsibilities of a particular surgery before attempting
them on their own. In the simulation model, the goal is to
replace real experiences with guided and immersive replicas.
Team members are immersed in surgical settings that evoke
or replicate what they may encounter during surgery.
    The goal of any training should be to ensure patient safety
while providing an optimal training environment. Another
goal is to increase productivity and efficiency. Simulation-­
based training can be the answer to foster those goals
­regardless of the team configuration. Simulations can be used
 to expose the team members to the steps and conditions of
 the surgery. It allows for knowledge sharing and feedback to
 be done in a setting without the possibility of patient harm.
 This gives team members access to valuable information not
 just on the steps needed to get the job done but also on the
918   L. Khaitan and J. Youssef

skills and capabilities of other team members. The feedback
on potential errors, which might otherwise be missed during
the usual clinical setting, can be exposed during the simula-
tion and prevented [20]. A simulated environment allows the
team members to grow, learn, and be challenged. Additionally,
simulation scenarios can be created from basic common
experiences or atypical experiences that the team may
encounter, thus preparing the team for a myriad of possibili-
ties. This can be particularly effective when preparing to per-
form a new procedure for the first time in the operating
room.
   Team members with proper training have improved effi-
ciency and productivity. There is less wasting of time and
resources. Training also improves morale as team members
are more likely to feel confident if they feel more prepared
for the surgeries. This causes less team turnover. Most impor-
tantly, fewer mistakes occur if team members do not lack the
knowledge and skills required for the job. The more profi-
cient each team member becomes, the less likely an error will
occur.


Conclusion
The reality of most operating room teams is perhaps a hybrid
between the consistent team and the cross-trained team mod-
els. Operating rooms utilize nurses, technicians, anesthesiolo-
gists, and physician assistants in their functional capacity but
in an ever-shuffling mix as per the demands of the operating
schedule as well as logistical and staffing issues. Additionally,
as to be expected in emergency surgery, most operating room
teams form ad hoc for the procedure. Thus, it is commonplace
for the surgeon to have a team consisting of different mem-
bers for different procedures throughout the operative day.
This is most evident as the institutions become larger as they
can employ dozens to hundreds of operating room staff.
   Ultimately, having a large operating room staff that is not
organized into teams results in team members working
       Chapter 47.   The Consistent Operating Room Team         919

loosely together and never developing the same cohesiveness
as a pure, consistent team should. It is for this reason that
team training in surgery is paramount to having a safe and
efficient operating room that communicates effectively with
mutual respect among all members of the team. The surgeon,
regardless of the team format, must first be a team player but
also a leader. They must establish a clear vision for the case,
provide the knowledge and method by which that goal can be
achieved, and coordinate/balance the conflicting interests of
all team members—avoiding the hierarchical model and real-
izing that every member in the operating room is equally
important in achieving the best patient care results in a better
“team” environment. As leaders, they must demonstrate that
leadership by taking all concerns into account in a safe man-
ner and providing an environment whereby team members
are encouraged to speak about their concerns and feel that
their concerns matter to everyone on the team, all in the
name of patient safety.
    Through team training, improvements in operating room
efficiency, quality of care, operating time, turnover time, and
overall team morale can all be improved and optimized.


References
 1. Armour Forse R, Bramble JD, McQuillan R. Team training can
    improve operating room performance. Surgery. 2011;150(4):771–
    8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.surg.2011.07.076.
 2. Callahan AM, et al. Abstract TP239: cross-training in-hospital
    operating staff significantly improves door-to-puncture time in
    thrombectomy patients. Stroke. 12 Feb. 2020. www.ahajounals.
    org/doi/abs/10.1161/str.51.suppl_1.TP239. Accessed 18 Feb 2021.
 3. Stepaniak PS, Heij C, Buise MP, Mannaerts GHH, Smulders JF,
    Nienhuijs SW. Bariatric surgery with operating room teams that
    stayed fixed during the day. Anesth Analg. 2012;115(6):1384–92.
    https://doi.org/10.1213/ANE.0b013e31826c7fa6.
 4. Xu RAB, Carty MJ, Orgill DP, Lipsitz SR, Duclos A. The team-
    ing curve. Ann Surg. 2013;258(6):953–7. https://doi.org/10.1097/
    SLA.0b013e3182864ffe.
920    L. Khaitan and J. Youssef

 5. Friedman DM, Sokal SM, Chang Y, Berger DL. Increasing
    operating room efficiency through parallel processing.
    Ann Surg. 2006;243(1):10–4. https://doi.org/10.1097/01.
    sla.0000193600.97748.b1.
 6. Stahl JE, Sandberg WS, Daily B, Wiklund R, Egan MT, Goldman
    JM, Isaacson KB, Gazelle S, Rattner DW. Reorganizing patient
    care and workflow in the operating room: a cost-effectiveness
    study. Surgery. 2006;139(6):717–28. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
    surg.2005.12.006. PMID: 16782425.
 7. Yates GR, Hochman RF, Sayles SM, et al. Sentara Norfolk General
    Hospital: accelerating improvement by focusing on building a
    culture of safety. Jt Comm J Qual Saf. 2004;30(10):534–42.
 8. Lingard L, Reznick R, Espin S, Regehr G, DeVito I. Team com-
    munications in the operating room: talk patterns, sites of tension,
    and implications for novices. Acad Med. 2002;77(3):232–7. https://
    doi.org/10.1097/00001888-­200203000-­0 0013. PMID: 11891163.
 9. Cendán JC, Good M. Interdisciplinary workflow assessment and
    redesign decreases operating room turnover time and allows
    for additional caseload. Arch Surg. 2006;141(1):65–9. https://doi.
    org/10.1001/archsurg.141.1.65; discussion 70. PMID: 16415413.
10. Haig KM, Sutton S, Whittington J. SBAR: a shared mental model
    for improving communication between clinicians. Jt Comm J
    Qual Patient Saf. 2006;32(3):167–75.
11. Fagin CM. Collaboration between nurses and physicians.
    Academic Med. 1992;67(5):295–303.
12. Cannon-Bowers JA, Salas E, Converse SA. Shared mental
    models in expert team decision-making. In: Castellan Jr NJ,
    editor. Current issues in individual and group decision making.
    Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum; 1993. p. 221–46.
13. Gjeraa K, Dieckmann P, Spanager L, Petersen RH, Østergaard
    D, Park YS, Konge L. Exploring shared mental models of surgi-
    cal teams in video-assisted Thoracoscopic surgery lobectomy.
    Ann Thorac Surg. 2019;107(3):954–61. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
    athoracsur.2018.08.010. Epub 2018 Oct 4. PMID: 30292841.
14. Gjeraa K, et al. Exploring shared mental models of surgical
    teams in video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery lobectomy. Ann
    Thorac Surg. 2019;107(3):954–61.
15. Burtscher MJ, Kolbe M, Wacker J, Manser T. Interactions of
    team mental models and monitoring behaviors predict team
    performance in simulated anesthesia inductions. J Exp Psychol
    Appl. 2011;17:257–26.
       Chapter 47.   The Consistent Operating Room Team          921

16. Henrickson SE, Wadhera RK, Elbardissi AW, Wiegmann DA,
    Sundt TM 3rd. Development and pilot evaluation of a pre-
    operative briefing protocol for cardiovascular surgery. J Am
    Coll Surg. 2009;208(6):1115–23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jamcoll-
    surg.2009.01.037. Epub 2009 Apr 17. PMID: 19476900; PMCID:
    PMC4282162.
17. Nundy S, Mukherjee A, Sexton JB, et al. Impact of preoperative
    briefings on operating room delays: a preliminary report. Arch
    Surg. 2008;143(11):68–72.
18. Stepaniak PS, Vrijland WW, de Quelerij M, de Vries G, Heij
    C. Working with a fixed operating room team on consecutive
    similar cases and the effect on case duration and turnover time.
    Arch Surg. 2010;145(12):1165–70. https://doi.org/10.1001/arch-
    surg.2010.255. PMID: 21173290.
19. Lam W, Kim GY, Petro C, Alhaj Saleh A, Khaitan L. Bariatric
    efficiency at an academic tertiary care center. Surg Endosc.
    2020;34(6):2567–71. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00464-­020-­07507-­6.
    Epub 2020 Mar 27. Erratum in: Surg Endosc. 2020 Apr 16;:
    PMID: 32221751.
20. Grogan EL, Stiles RA, France DJ, et al. The impact of aviation-­
    based teamwork training on the attitudes of health-care profes-
    sionals. J Am Coll Surg. 2004;199:843–8.
Chapter 48
Prevention of Common
Bile Duct Injury: What
Are we as Surgeons
Doing to Prevent Injury
Nabajit Choudhury, Manoj Kumar Choudhury,
and Rebecca B. Kowalski




History of Common Bile Duct Injury
Anatomical knowledge of the biliary tree has been traced
back as far as 2000 BC [1]. Gallstone disease was found in a
mummy from Egypt from around 1500 BC [1]. In contrast,
the history of gallbladder surgery is relatively brief. The first


N. Choudhury (*)
The University of Tennessee Health Science Center,
Memphis, TN, USA
e-mail: nchoudh2@uthsc.edu
M. K. Choudhury
Senior Consultant, GI and MIS, Nemcare Superspecialty Hospital,
Assam, India
R. B. Kowalski
Northwell Health at Lenox Hill Hospital, New York, NY, USA
e-mail: RKowalski@northwell.edu

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature   923
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_48
924   N. Choudhury et al.

surgical interventions on the biliary tree were removal of
gallstones by Fabricus in 1618 [1] and creation of a cholecys-
tostomy by Bobbs in 1867 [1]. The creation of a cholecystos-
tomy provided temporary relief but led to other issues,
namely, persistent pain and fistulas [2]. This was the standard
treatment for biliary disease until Carl Langenbuch per-
formed the first cholecystectomy in 1882 [1, 2]. By 1897, over
100 cholecystectomies had been performed [2]. Courvoisier
performed the first choledochotomy in 1890 [1]. The first iat-
rogenic bile duct injury was described by Sprengel in 1891 [1],
and the first choledochoduodenostomy was also performed
by Sprengel in a patient whose distal common bile duct
(CBD) was unable to be cleared of stones following a chole-
cystectomy [1]. The first intraoperative cholangiogram was
performed by Mirizzi in 1931 [3]. In 1985, Erich Mühe per-
formed the first laparoscopic cholecystectomy, and the surgi-
cal treatment of biliary disease was transformed.
Unfortunately, one of the unexpected consequences of the
rapid adaptation of the new surgical technique of laparo-
scopic cholecystectomy was a two- to fourfold increase in the
rate of bile duct injury compared to open cholecystectomy:
the rate of bile duct injury (BDI) is estimated to be approxi-
mately 0.2% by Roslyn et al. in an analysis of 42,474 patients
undergoing open cholecystectomy [4] and up to 0.5% in an
analysis of 40 series by MacFayden et al. in 114,005 patients
undergoing laparoscopic cholecystectomy [5]. Unfortunately,
despite the many advantages of laparoscopic cholecystec-
tomy, the rate of bile duct injury remains higher in laparo-
scopic cholecystectomy than in open cholecystectomy. There
is significant morbidity associated with bile duct injury [6–9]
and a significant alteration in the patient’s life after this dev-
astating complication.
    Multiple studies have been done to try to identify bile duct
injury prevention strategies during laparoscopic cholecystec-
tomy. Since the overall incidence is low, definitive studies to
compare the techniques will likely never be performed [10].
However, these studies have identified factors that are
related to an increased risk of bile duct injury, including tim-
         Chapter 48. Prevention of Common Bile Duct…        925

ing of the procedure and patient selection [11–15]. Two of the
most frequently used techniques are clear identification of
the Critical View of Safety, which was first described by
Strasberg et al. over 25 years ago [11, 16], and intraoperative
cholangiography.


SAGES Safe Cholecystectomy Task Force
The SAGES Safe Cholecystectomy Task Force was launched
in 2014 to tackle the issue of educating residents, fellows, and
practicing surgeons about technical steps to prevent bile duct
injury, such as the Critical View of Safety and intraoperative
biliary imaging [17]. There are six steps recommended by the
Safe Cholecystectomy Task Force to help reduce the inci-
dence of BDI [10]:
1. Use the Critical View of Safety (CVS) method of identifi-
   cation of the cystic duct and cystic artery during laparo-
   scopic cholecystectomy. Three criteria are required to
   achieve the CVS:
  (a) The hepatocystic triangle is cleared of fat and fibrous
      tissue. The hepatocystic triangle is defined as the tri-
      angle formed by the cystic duct, the common hepatic
      duct, and inferior edge of the liver. The common bile
      duct and common hepatic duct do not have to be
      exposed.
  (b) The lower one third of the gallbladder is separated
      from the liver to expose the cystic plate. The cystic
      plate is also known as liver bed of the gallbladder and
      lies in the gallbladder fossa.
  (c) Two and only two structures should be seen entering
      the gallbladder (see Fig. 48.1a and b).
2. Understand the potential for aberrant anatomy in all cases.
  (a) Aberrant anatomy may include a short cystic duct,
      aberrant hepatic ducts, or a right hepatic artery that
926    N. Choudhury et al.


 a                                 b




Figure 48.1 (a). The critical view of safety: anterior view [10]. (b)
The critical view of safety: posterior view [10]

       crosses anterior to the common bile duct. These are
       some but not all common variants.
3. Make liberal use of cholangiography or other methods to
   image the biliary tree intraoperatively.
   (a) Cholangiography may be especially important in diffi-
       cult cases or unclear anatomy.
   (b) Several studies have found that cholangiography
       reduces the incidence and extent of bile duct injury but
       controversy remains on this subject.
4. Consider an intraoperative momentary pause during lapa-
   roscopic cholecystectomy prior to clipping, cutting, or tran-
   secting any ductal structures.
   (a) The intraoperative momentary pause should consist of
       a stop point in the operation to confirm that the CVS
       has been achieved utilizing the doublet view.
5. Recognize when the dissection is approaching a zone of
   significant risk and halt the dissection before entering the
   zone. Finish the operation by a safe method other than
   cholecystectomy if conditions around the gallbladder are
   too dangerous.
         Chapter 48. Prevention of Common Bile Duct…           927

  (a) In situations in which there is severe inflammation in
      the porta hepatis and neck of the gallbladder, the CVS
      can be difficult to achieve. The sole fact that achieving
      a CVS appears not feasible is a key benefit of the
      method since it alerts the surgeon to possible danger
      of injury.
  (b) The surgical judgment that a zone of significant risk is
      being approached can be made when there is failure to
      obtain adequate exposure of the anatomy of the hepa-
      tocystic triangle or when the dissection is not progress-
      ing due to bleeding, inflammation, or fibrosis.
  (c) Consider laparoscopic subtotal cholecystectomy or
      cholecystostomy tube placement and/or conversion to
      an open procedure based on the judgment of the
      attending surgeon.
6. Get help from another surgeon when the dissection or con-
   ditions are difficult.
   (a) When it is practical to obtain, the advice of a second
       surgeon is often very helpful under conditions in which
       the dissection is stalled or the anatomy is unclear or
       under other conditions deemed “difficult” by the
       surgeon.


Intraoperative Cholangiography
In addition to achieving the CVS, intraoperative cholangiog-
raphy (IOC) is a critical tool during laparoscopic or open
cholecystectomy to identify anatomical abnormalities or
unclear biliary anatomy. There has been significant debate
about routine versus selective cholangiography [7, 17–23].
While IOC may help in early identification of bile duct inju-
ries, it does not in and of itself prevent bile duct injuries [17].
   Indications for IOC include abnormal liver function tests,
suspicion of CBD stone on preoperative imaging, CBD diam-
eter more than 6 mm, history of jaundice, history of pancre-
atitis or cholangitis without preoperative ERCP, presence of
928   N. Choudhury et al.

unclear biliary anatomy due to congenital anomalies, dis-
torted anatomy due to pathological process of the gallblad-
der, identification of bile duct injury, determination of the
severity of bile duct injury, or detection of bile leakage.
   Other intraoperative techniques such as choledochoscopy
or common bile duct exploration (CBDE) can be similarly
helpful in the management of choledocholithiasis and its
complications. Additional intraoperative techniques and tools
include a variety of dissection techniques such as “top-down”
dissection if the infundibulum of the gallbladder is difficult;
landmark techniques such as Rouvière’s sulcus, which indi-
cates the plane of the main bile duct, where any dissection
below this point is avoided in order to eliminate any danger
to the bile duct during surgery [24]; intraoperative ultra-
sound; and intraoperative fluorescence cholangiography.
   In the future, ultrasound and intraoperative fluorescence
cholangiography may help to reduce bile duct injury without
requiring IOC. In this respect, near-infrared fluorescence
cholangiography (NIRFC) was developed [25–27], and a mul-
ticenter randomized controlled trial is currently recruiting to
compare NIRFC-assisted laparoscopic cholecystectomy with
conventional laparoscopic cholecystectomy (FALCON trial)
[28]. To use NIRFC, indocyanine green (ICG) is injected
intravenously, and an NIR light-emitting xenon-based light
source and a camera that can detect NIR fluorescence emit-
ted by indocyanine green-dyed bile are used to visualize the
biliary anatomy [25–29]. Neither the dye (at normal doses)
nor the equipment is dangerous (no irradiation) for the
patient or surgeon [11]. NIRFC has been shown to be quicker
to perform and to cost less when compared with IOC [30].
Increased safety has yet to be proven [11]. Theoretically, it
should be possible to perform NIRFC in all cases versus a
93% rate for IOC due to difficulty with cannulation of the
cystic duct [11, 31–33]. The one clinical situation in which ICG
may not be able to be administered is in the pregnant patient,
as it is considered a Category C medication with unknown
affects to the fetus and has not been studied or tested in preg-
nant women [34]. The other factor is that in order to be able
to be used efficiently, it needs to be given at least 20 minutes
            Chapter 48. Prevention of Common Bile Duct…                         929

before attempts to visualize the NIRFC to allow uptake of
the ICG into the liver and excretion into the bile. Therefore,
it would need to be administered prior to the incision and
would be less useful if the anatomy was unclear in the middle
of the cholecystectomy.


Summary
The rate of bile duct injury increased with the introduction of
laparoscopic cholecystectomy, and while the rate during lapa-
roscopic cholecystectomy has decreased, it remains higher
than during open cholecystectomy. Routine cholangiography
has not been demonstrated to reduce the rate of bile duct
injury, although it can help identify an injury. The SAGES Safe
Cholecystectomy Task Force has six steps that have been iden-
tified to help prevent bile duct injuries. Indocyanine green and
intraoperative ultrasound are potential future tools that may
be helpful in preventing bile duct injuries, although further
studies are needed to demonstrate a decrease in the rate of
bile duct injury. The SAGES Safe Cholecystectomy Task Force
endeavored to standardize best practices for the elimination
of BDI, a rare complication of one of the most common gen-
eral surgical procedures. These efforts should serve as a tem-
plate for organizing and presenting evidence-­based standards
for reducing complication rates of other common general
surgical procedures. These society-led efforts to improve qual-
ity care and patient outcomes in focused clinical areas are at
the heart of the purpose of their existence.


References
 1. Jabłońska B, Lampe P. Iatrogenic bile duct injuries: etiol-
    ogy, diagnosis and management. World J Gastroenterol.
    2009;15(33):4097–104. https://doi.org/10.3748/wjg.15.4097.
 2. The History of Medicine: The Galling Gallbladder.
    htt ps: / / c ol um b ia s u rg e r y. o rg /n e w s /2 0 15 /0 6 /11/his tor y-­
    medicine-­galling-­gallbladder.
930    N. Choudhury et al.

 3. Litynski GS. Erich Mühe and the rejection of laparoscopic
    cholecystectomy (1985): a surgeon ahead of his time. JSLS.
    1998;2(4):341–6.
 4. Roslyn JJ, Binns GS, Hughes EF, Saunders-Kirkwood K, Zinner
    MJ, Cates JA. Open cholecystectomy. A contemporary analysis
    of 42,474 patients. Ann Surg. 1993;218(2):129–37.
 5. MacFadyen BV Jr, Vecchio R, Ricardo AE, Mathis CR. Bile duct
    injury after laparoscopic cholecystectomy. The United States
    experience Surgical Endoscopy. 1998;12:315–21.
 6. Keus F, de Jong JAF, Gooszen HG, Van Laarhoven
    CJHM. Laparoscopic versus open cholecystectomy for patients
    with symptomatic cholecystolithiasis. Cochrane Database Syst
    Rev. 2006:CD006231.
 7. Buddingh KT, Weersma RK, Savenije RA, van Dam GM,
    Nieuwenhuijs VB. Lower rate of major bile duct injury and
    increased intraoperative management of common bile duct
    stones after implementation of routine intraoperative cholangi-
    ography. J Am Coll Surg. 2011;213:267–74.
 8. Kern KA. Malpractice litigation involving laparoscopic cho-
    lecystectomy. Cost, cause, and consequences. Arch Surg.
    1997;132:392–7; discussion 7-8.
 9. Flum DR, Flowers C, Veenstra DL. A cost-effectiveness analysis
    of intraoperative cholangiography in the prevention of bile duct
    injury during laparoscopic cholecystectomy. J Am Coll Surg.
    2003;196:385–93.
10. The SAGES Safe Cholecystectomy Program. Strategies for
    Minimizing Bile Duct Injuries: Adopting a Universal Culture
    of Safety in Cholecystectomy. https://www.sages.org/safe-­
    cholecystectomy-­program/. Accessed December 10 2020.
11. Renz BW, Bösch F, Angele MK. Bile duct injury after cholecys-
    tectomy: surgical therapy. Visc Med. 2017;33(3):184–90.
12. de Mestral C, Rotstein OD, Laupacis A, et al. Comparative
    operative outcomes of early and delayed cholecystectomy for
    acute cholecystitis: a population-based propensity score analysis.
    Ann Surg. 2014;259:10–5.
13. Blohm M, Österberg J, Sandblom G, Lundell L, Hedberg M,
    Enochsson L. The sooner, the better? The importance of opti-
    mal timing of cholecystectomy in acute cholecystitis: data from
    the national Swedish registry for gallstone surgery. GallRiks J
    Gastrointest Surg. 2017;21:33–40.
14. da Costa DW, Dijksman LM, Bouwense SA, et al. Cost-­
    effectiveness of same-admission versus interval cholecystectomy
            Chapter 48. Prevention of Common Bile Duct…             931

      after mild gallstone pancreatitis in the PONCHO trial. Brit J
      Surg. 2016;103:1695–703.
15.   Tan JKH, Goh JCI, Lim JWL, Shridhar IG, Madhavan K, Kow
      AWC. Same admission laparoscopic cholecystectomy for acute
      cholecystitis: is the ‘golden 72 hours' rule still relevant? HPB
      (Oxford). 2017;19:47–51.
16.   Strasberg SM, Hertl M, Soper NJ. An analysis of the problem of
      biliary injury during laparoscopic cholecystectomy. J Am Coll
      Surg. 1995;180:101–25.
17.   Brunt LM, Deziel DJ, Telem DA, Strasberg SM, Aggarwal R,
      Asbun H, et al. Safe cholecystectomy multi-society practice
      guideline and state of the art consensus conference on pre-
      vention of bile duct injury during cholecystectomy. Ann Surg.
      2020;272(1):3–23.
18.   Fletcher DR, Hobbs MS, Tan P, et al. Complications of chole-
      cystectomy: risks of the laparoscopic approach and protective
      effects of operative cholangiography: a population-based study.
      Ann Surg. 1999;229:449–57.
19.   Alvarez FA, de Santibañes M, Palavecino M, et al. Impact of
      routine intraoperative cholangiography during laparoscopic
      cholecystectomy on bile duct injury. Brit J Surg. 2014;101:677–84.
20.   Buddingh KT, Nieuwenhuijs VB, van Buuren L, Hulscher
      JBF, de Jong JS, van Dam GM. Intraoperative assessment of
      biliary anatomy for prevention of bile duct injury: a review of
      current and future patient safety interventions. Surg Endosc.
      2011;25:2449–61.
21.   Hugh TB, Kelly MD, Mekisic A. Rouvière's sulcus: a useful land-
      mark in laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Br J Surg. 1997;84:1253–4.
22.   Ferzli G, Timoney M, Nazir S, Swedler D, Fingerhut A. Importance
      of the node of Calot in gallbladder neck dissection: an important
      landmark in the standardized approach to the laparoscopic cho-
      lecystectomy. J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech. 2015;25:28–32.
23.   Pucher PH, Brunt LM, Fanelli RD, Asbun HJ, Aggarwal
      R. SAGES expert Delphi consensus: critical factors for safe
      surgical practice in laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Surg Endosc.
      2015;29:3074–85.
24.   Singh M, Prasad N. The anatomy of Rouviere's sulcus as seen
      during laparoscopic cholecystectomy: a proposed classification.
      J Minim Access Surg. 2017;13(2):89–95.
25.   Daskalaki D, Fernandes E, Wang X, et al. Indocyanine green
      (ICG) fluorescent cholangiography during robotic cholecystec-
932      N. Choudhury et al.

      tomy: results of 184 consecutive cases in a single institution. Surg
      Innov. 2014;21:615–21.
26.   Ashitate Y, Stockdale A, Choi HS, Laurence RG, Frangioni
      JV. Real-time simultaneous near-infrared fluorescence imaging
      of bile duct and arterial anatomy. J Surg Res. 2012;176:7–13.
27.   Ankersmit M, van Dam DA, van Rijswijk A-S, van den Heuvel
      B, Tuynman JB, Meijerink WJHJ. Fluorescent imaging with indo-
      cyanine green during laparoscopic cholecystectomy in patients
      at increased risk of bile duct injury. Surg Innov. 2017; https://doi.
      org/10.1177/1553350617690309.
28.   van den Bos J, Schols RM, Luyer MD, et al. Near-infrared fluo-
      rescence cholangiography assisted laparoscopic cholecystectomy
      versus conventional laparoscopic cholecystectomy (FALCON
      trial): study protocol for a multicentre randomised controlled
      trial. BMJ Open. 2016;6:e011668.
29.   Boni L, David G, Mangano A, et al. Clinical applications of
      indocyanine green (ICG) enhanced fluorescence in laparoscopic
      surgery. Surg Endosc. 2015;29:2046–55.
30.   Dip FD, Asbun D, Rosales-Velderrain A, et al. Cost analysis
      and effectiveness comparing the routine use of intraoperative
      fluorescent cholangiography with fluoroscopic cholangiogram in
      patients undergoing laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Surg Endosc.
      2014;28:1838–43.
31.   Ishizawa T, Bandai Y, Hasegawa K, Kokudo N. Fluorescent chol-
      angiography during laparoscopic cholecystectomy: indocyanine
      green or new fluorescent agents? World J Surg. 2010;34:2505–6.
32.   Livingston EH, Miller JAG, Coan B, Rege RV. Costs and utili-
      zation of intraoperative cholangiography. J Gastrointest Surg.
      2007;11:1162–7.
33.   Ambe PC, Plambeck J, Fernandez-Jesberg V, et al. The role of
      indocyanine green fluoroscopy for intraoperative bile duct visu-
      alization during laparoscopic cholecystectomy: an observational
      cohort study in 70 patients. Patient Saf Surg. 2019;13:2.
34.   https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2006/
      011525s017lbl.pdf
Chapter 49
OR Attire: Does it
Impact Quality?
Yasmin Essaji, Kelly Mahuron, and Adnan Alseidi




   “Quality is never an accident; it is always the results of high inten-
   tion, sincere effort, intelligent direction and skillful execution; it
   represents the wise choice of many alternatives.” - William
   A. Foster.



Introduction
Operating room (OR) attire has come a long way since the
days of Dr. William Grant performing what is believed to be
the first successful appendectomy in the USA in 1885, in Iowa.
ORs in the nineteenth century were structured as stages with
rows of seats for students to watch, and surgeons either wore
their business suits or donned their favorite coat, which some
used to wipe their bloody scalpels between cases. Surgical



Y. Essaji
Division of HPB Surgery, Virginia Mason Medical Center,
Seattle, WA, USA
K. Mahuron · A. Alseidi (*)
Department of Surgery, University of California San Francisco,
San Francisco, CA, USA
e-mail: Adnan.alseidi@ucsf.edu

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature             933
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_49
934   Y. Essaji et al.

attire began to evolve with the widespread acceptance of germ
theory in the late nineteenth century. Evaluation of photo-
graphs from early surgical operations shows the general
implementation of surgical gowns in 1863, while caps, gloves,
and masks followed between 1900 and 1916 [1]. Through the
years, it has by and large been accepted that surgical gowns,
gloves, caps, and masks protect both the surgeon and the
patient and decrease surgical site infection (SSI) rates. SSIs
are the most common hospital-acquired infection and contrib-
ute to increased length of stay and risk of mortality. The idea
that OR attire is linked to increased SSIs has been further
explored in several retrospective studies and meta-­analyses,
for example, glove perforation being associated with increased
SSI rates and that changing gloves before closure during
colorectal surgery reduces SSI rates. Studies dating back to
1976 by Noble and colleagues demonstrated that the human
body and inanimate surfaces in the OR contribute to micro-
bial contamination, and this has been extrapolated to contrib-
ute to increased SSI rates. However, few randomized control
trials (RCTs) exist evaluating this surgical dogma. One RCT
from England showed no difference in SSIs when non-
scrubbed OR personnel wore face masks or not. Despite the
lack of strong evidence, many guidelines have been estab-
lished in attempts to reduce SSI rates given the clinical impact
they have on patients. One of the principles of Hippocrates is
to treat the ill to the best of one’s abilities, and most surgeons
would agree that everything must be done to one’s best ability
to protect the patient from harm, including SSIs. However,
guidelines made without any evidence are equivalent to opin-
ion. Dr. Guyatt first introduced the concept of evidence-based
medicine in 1992 as critical appraisal and judicial application
of the evidence [2]. It has served as a guiding principle of
medicine in the modern era by which judicial evaluation of
guidelines and practices is performed. Margaret McCartney
from the Cochrane Colloquium Edinburgh said: “Ignoring
evidence leads to avoidable harm, and failing to admit our
uncertainties means we don’t get better evidence.” This fur-
ther highlights the frustration which can come from imposed
guidelines in perioperative safety, especially as it pertains to
          Chapter 49.      OR Attire: Does it Impact Quality?     935

OR attire and personal freedoms. This chapter will serve as a
review of the previous guidelines, current evidence, and impli-
cations for future practice.


Types of Surgical Attire
Surgical attire revolves around the dichotomy of reusable and
disposable [3]. Most facilities have moved to reusable cloth
scrubs which are changed daily and laundered by the respec-
tive institution. Surgical jackets, as seen in Fig. 49.1, are typi-
cally reusable and laundered by the institution. Individual


      Disposable Skull Cap              Disposable Bouffant Cap




         Cloth Skull Cap                    Surgical Jacket




Figure 49.1 Types of surgical attire illustrating both disposable and
cloth skull cap, disposable bouffant cap, and surgical jacket
936   Y. Essaji et al.

healthcare workers have purchased reusable cloth hats; how-
ever, this is dependent on institutions laundering each indi-
vidual’s hat and returning it to them which can be an arduous
process. Many guidelines have dissuaded against healthcare
workers laundering any perioperative clothing in their private
homes given the potential risk of contamination with blood-
borne pathogens to themself and, as well, concern that there
would not be standardized adherence to necessary laundering
protocols. Many centers have adopted and mandated dispos-
able surgical caps. Typically, the skull cap would be specific for
short-haired individuals and the bouffant hat would be for
those with longer hair, ponytails, or buns in order to cover it
adequately.


Current Guidelines

 ORN 2015 (Updated Publication in January
A
2020)
A critical paradigm shift occurred in 2015 with the publica-
tion of the revised Guideline for Surgical Attire by the
Association of periOperative Registered Nurses (AORN).
These guidelines, written by perioperative registered nurses,
were challenged on many fronts and were felt to be based
upon weak evidence. Additionally, the OR team comprises
many different healthcare disciplines including nurses, scrub
technicians, surgeons, anesthesiologists, and custodians,
among others. The AORN guidelines were criticized for only
involving a single discipline’s input.
   Many state health organizations and accreditation bodies
utilize AORN’s Guidelines for Perioperative Practice for con-
tinued evaluation that a center is upholding current periop-
erative practices. AORN guidelines are also the only
evidence-­based guidelines for perioperative nurses approved
by the National Guideline Clearinghouse which is run by the
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. AORN guide-
lines published in 2015 were updated in January 2020; how-
ever, the 2015 version is currently in practice in most centers.
         Chapter 49.   OR Attire: Does it Impact Quality?   937

    The 2015 guidelines sparked an onslaught of research
regarding the impact of OR attire and revolutionized how
perioperative guidelines are created and implemented. Some
perioperative healthcare workers saw these guidelines as an
attack on personal liberties thinly veiled in weak or no evi-
dence. In particular, recommendation III endorsed surgical
head attire with complete coverage of the scalp, hair, nape of
the neck, and ears. As the AORN guidelines were considered
the standard for measuring patient safety, many hospitals
received citations for noncompliance and subsequently
banned skull caps. The American College of Surgeons (ACS)
responded by publishing their first dress code in 2016, based
upon “professionalism, common, sense, decorum, and the
available evidence [4].” Other organizations, including the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the
World Health Organization (WHO), followed suit and pub-
lished their updated guidelines. Several collaborative sum-
mits occurred, most notably the Operating Room Attire
Summit of 2018. This summit contained members from ACS,
the American Society of Anesthesiologists, AORN, the
Association for Professionals in Infection Control and
Epidemiology, the Association of Surgical Technologist, the
Council on Surgical and Perioperative Safety, and The Joint
Commission. The organizations reviewed the available
­evidence relating to OR attire recommendations, specifically
 focusing on the recommendations related to ear and hair
 covering. They concluded that (1) evidence-based recommen-
 dations on OR attire should be developed with a multidisci-
 plinary team, (2) current evidence is not sufficient to require
 ear coverage or associate the type of hat or extent of hair
 coverage with SSI rates, and (3) other areas of surgical attire
 need further evaluation.
    AORN subsequently published revisions to their
 Guidelines for Perioperative Practice in July 2019 that were
 aligned with the summit, and these revisions were officially
 updated in January 2020 after review by AORN members.
 Notable changes included retraction of their previous surgi-
 cal headwear recommendation stating “no recommendation
 can be made for the type of head covers worn in semi-­
938   Y. Essaji et al.

restricted and restricted areas” with retained recommenda-
tion to “cover the scalp and hair when entering the
semi-restricted and restricted areas.” The type of surgical
head cover may be determined by the individual healthcare
facility, but they expanded their recommendations to include
the covering of beards when entering the restricted areas and
while preparing and packaging items in the clean assembly
section of the sterile processing area. Additionally, they noted
that no recommendation could be made regarding arm cover-
age other than when performing preoperative patient skin
antisepsis. There is a conditional recommendation to cover
the arms while performing skin antisepsis referring to one
semi-experimental study published in American Journal of
Infection Control in 2018 which showed decreased bacterial
shedding when arms were covered by the healthcare worker
who was sterile prepping the surgical site.
   The most recent AORN guidelines point to a stronger sup-
port for double-gloving citing a systematic review that showed
a reduced risk of sharps injury. This is further supported by a
Cochrane Review published in 2006 which showed that dou-
ble-gloving reduced perforations to the innermost glove; how-
ever, the study had insufficient power to determine any effect
on SSIs. A further Cochrane Review in 2014 concluded that
there is moderate-quality evidence that double-gloving
reduces blood stains on skin which may translate to lower risk
of contracting serious blood-borne viral infections.
   The AORN guideline revisions made notable changes to
the use and classification of evidence for each guideline and
now provide summary tables ranking the evidence. These
revisions were developed around evidence-based practices,
and they reflect the collaborative efforts of a multidisci-
plinary team.


ACS 2017

Probably the most practical and pragmatic guidelines were
published by ACS in 2017. Appropriate OR attire is regarded
          Chapter 49.    OR Attire: Does it Impact Quality?          939

by ACS as a reflection of professionalism as it can help to
establish and maintain a patient-physician relationship as
well as reduce healthcare-associated infections and improve
patient safety by reducing SSIs. ACS guidelines for surgical
attire are based on professionalism as well as a degree of
common sense availing to the limited high-quality evidence
available. AORN disagreed with this approach as the guide-
lines were not solely based upon evidence. ACS guidelines on
surgical attire are summarized in Table 49.1.

Table 49.1 ACS statement on operating room attire
ACS statement on OR attire 2016
Soiled scrubs and/or hats should be changed as soon as feasible
and certainly prior to speaking with family members after a
surgical procedure
Scrubs and hats worn during dirty or contaminated cases should
be changed prior to subsequent cases even if not visibly soiled
Masks should not be worn dangling at any tim
OR scrubs should not be worn in the hospital facility outside of
the OR area without a clean lab coat or appropriate cover up
over them
OR scrubs should not be worn at any time outside of the
hospital perimeter
OR scrubs should be changed at least daily
During invasive procedures, the mouth, nose, and hair (skull
and face) should be covered to avoid potential wound
contamination. Large sideburns and ponytails should be
covered or contained. There is no evidence that leaving ears,
a limited amount of hair on the nape of the neck or a modest
sideburn uncovered contributes to wound infections
Earrings and jewelry worn on the head or neck where they
might fall into or contaminate the sterile field should all be
removed or appropriately covered during procedures
The ACS encourages clean appropriate professional attire (not
scrubs) to be worn during all patient encounters outside of the OR
Reproduced with permission from [4]
940   Y. Essaji et al.

   ACS additionally wrote that “the skullcap is symbolic of
the surgical profession.” They emphasized patient quality
and safety and established that as stewards of the healthcare
profession, surgeons much retain emphasis on key princi-
ples of their culture and uphold the public perception of
surgeons as highly trustworthy, attentive, professional, and
compassionate.


CDC 2017

The CDC’s Guideline for the Prevention of Surgical Site
Infection, 2017, consists of broad and overarching guidelines
regarding topics such as perioperative antibiotics, glycemic
control, and normothermia. Due to the paucity of evidence,
the CDC only published one statement regarding OR attire:
• Available evidence suggested uncertain trade-offs between
  the benefits and harms of orthopedic space suits or the
  healthcare personnel who should wear them for the
  ­prevention of SSI in prosthetic joint arthroplasty (no rec-
   ommendation/unresolved issue).
   Although the CDC guidelines are based on higher-quality
evidence, they highlight the need for individual institutional
review of guidelines prior to implementation.


WHO 2018

The WHO’s Global Guidelines for the Prevention of Surgical
Site Infection, originally published in 2016 [5] and updated in
2018, has several guidelines on reducing major contributors
to SSIs including preoperative measures and skin prepara-
tion, nutritional maintenance, prevention of hypothermia,
and antibiotic prophylaxis. These guidelines are based on
global practices which can be varied based on a country’s
economic standing and healthcare access. The WHO provides
one recommendation regarding OR attire:
         Chapter 49.   OR Attire: Does it Impact Quality?   941

• The panel suggests that either sterile, disposable, non-­
  woven or sterile, reusable woven drapes and surgical
  gowns can be used during surgical operations for the pur-
  poses of preventing SSI (conditional recommendation,
  moderate to very low quality of evidence).
   The WHO acknowledges the research gaps in the field of
OR attire, especially in lower-resource countries, and they
continue to support well-designed RCTs for the evaluation of
further guidelines.


Evidenced-Based Practices
Since the publication of the revised Guidelines for Surgical
Attire by AORN in 2015, there has been an outpouring of
research on this topic to help better understand the implica-
tion of surgical attire on SSI rates. Most researchers under-
stand the limitations of semi-experimental bacterial-based
research findings and how these wrestle with the difficulties
of implementing pragmatic OR attire guideline changes. As
well, some researchers express difficulties in conducting
higher-level studies such as RCTs due to reluctance in alter-
ing already imposed guidelines. This culminates in the major-
ity of the body of research being retrospective reviews which
do help to show associations, however remain of lower-­
quality evidence in the pyramid of evidence-based medicine.
The National Academy of Medicine’s Standards for
Developing Trustworthy Clinical Practice Guidelines
addresses the limitations of evaluating the available evidence.
They provide standards for the development of medical
guidelines and as well provide a model for formulating rec-
ommendations as shown in Figs. 49.2 and 49.3.


Surgical Head Coverings

The 2015 AORN recommendation that skull caps be replaced
with disposable bouffant hats led to multiple studies compar-
942   Y. Essaji et al.




                                             Summary of relevant
                                              available evidence,
       Clear description of the
                                             description of quality,
        potential benefits and
                                          quantity, and consistency
               harms.
                                          of the aggregate available
                                                   evidence.




                           Explanation of the part
                         played by values, opinion,
                             theory, and clinical
                         experience in deriving the
                              recommendation.




Figure 49.2 National Academy of Medicine’s Standards for
Developing Trustworthy Clinical Practice Guidelines. Establishing
evidence

ing the associated SSI rates between the two. A study pub-
lished in Hernia in 2017 by Haskins and colleagues sent a
survey to surgeons who submitted at least 10 patients with
30-day follow-up in the Americas Hernia Society Quality
Collaborative database [6]. From this survey, 6210 cases were
identified, and the authors found no association between
reported surgical hat type and wound events at a 30-day fol-
low-­up after ventral hernia repair. Another study, published in
Neurosurgery in 2018 by Shallwani and colleagues, was a sin-
gle-center retrospective review that included over 15,000 clean
neurosurgical cases spanning 13 months before and 13 months
after the ban of surgical skull caps [7]. This study showed a
0.07% increase in overall infections, a 0.03% increase in infec-
tions in spinal procedures, and a 0.2% decrease in infections in
          Chapter 49.     OR Attire: Does it Impact Quality?   943




           Standards:
                I.   Establish transparency
              II.    Management of conflict of interest
             III.    Guideline development group
                     composition
             IV.     Clinical practice guideline-systematic
                     review intersection
              V.     Establishing evidence foundations for
                     and rating strength of recommendations
             VI.     Articulation of recommendations
            VII.     External review
           VIII.     Updating




Figure 49.3 National Academy of Medicine’s Standards for
Developing Trustworthy Clinical Practice Guidelines

craniotomy/craniectomy cases after the switch from skull caps
to bouffant hats. None of the outcomes reached statistical sig-
nificance, and the authors concluded that banning skull caps
did not significantly reduce infection rates. A third study, pub-
lished in the Journal of the American College of Surgeons in
2018 by Kothari and colleagues, was a retrospective review of
1543 patients undergoing general surgery and abdominal sur-
geries [8]. Similar to the other studies discussed, no correlation
was found between the use of skull caps versus bouffant hats
and SSI rates. The authors of these studies therefore concluded
that there is no clear evidence that the type of surgical hat
impacts the rate of SSIs.
    However, there was one study that suggested a possible
advantage of skull caps over bouffant hats. Markel and col-
leagues evaluated the passive and active microbial shed from
different head gear in a simulated sterile OR environment [9].
Their results were published in the Journal of the American
College of Surgeons in 2017. They found that although there
was no significant difference in particle or actively sampled
944   Y. Essaji et al.

microbial contamination between the head wear types, there
was a higher passive microbial shed among disposable bouf-
fant hats than disposable skull caps (p < 0.05). Additionally,
disposable bouffant hats exhibited significantly higher particle
size and passive microbial shed than cloth skull caps. The
study did not include cloth bouffant hats. The authors con-
cluded that disposable bouffant hats had greater permeability,
penetration, and passive microbial shed than disposable or
cloth skull caps. This study supports the revisions made to the
AORN guidelines, which no longer recommend the avoidance
of skull caps. Currently there is no clear benefit to support one
type of surgical head covering over another for the reduction
of SSI rates, and further research is needed before evidence-
based recommendations can be made.


Surgical Masks

A systematic review by Lipp and colleagues in the Canadian
Operating Room Nursing Journal published in 2005 evalu-
ated two RCTs involving 1453 patients undergoing clean
surgery and showed a trend toward masks being associated
with fewer infections in one trial; however, in neither trial was
this significant [10]. This is further supported with the 2016
updated Cochrane review evaluating trials involving 2106
patients in which they found no significant difference in
infection rates between masked and unmasked groups under-
going clean surgery [11]. The question of whether all OR
personnel should wear masks versus only scrubbed surgical
personnel was also evaluated in a 2010 RCT by Webster and
colleagues which showed no difference in SSI rate when non-­
scrubbed personnel did not wear a face mask [12]. An addi-
tional Cochrane review published in 2018 also looked at the
question of masks versus no masks and did not find a signfi-
cant difference in surgical site infections [13]. Surgical masks
provide benefit to scrubbed surgical personnel from blood-­
borne pathogens and should be worn by scrubbed OR per-
sonnel for their own protection even if no direct benefit to
patients can be shown in terms of reduced SSI rates.
         Chapter 49.   OR Attire: Does it Impact Quality?   945

OR Jackets and Bare Below the Elbows

AORN guidelines from 2015 quoted moderate evidence
for all non-scrubbed personnel completely covering their
arms with a long-sleeved scrub top or jacket when in
restricted areas. An observational study from 2016 at the
University of Minnesota compared SSI rates 12 months
prior to the implementation of surgical jackets in their
facility and 12 months following implementation of the
AORN guidelines. They found no statistically significant
difference in SSI rates. AORN quotes one study which did
show increased bacterial shedding from uncovered arms
only related to the individual prepping the surgical site
and, therefore, recommends arm coverage for personnel
performing skin antisepsis. The 2020 AORN guidelines
were amended with no recommendation for covering arms
outside of during skin prep.
   The bare below the elbows (BBE) policy adopted by the
National Health Service (NHS) in the UK has also been a
source of controversy. It is published as a position statement
by the NHS; however, direct implementation is referred back
to individual health centers. The BBE policy states that arms
must be bare below the elbows which restricts the use of
watches and jewelry as well as white coats. There is limited
evidence for its implementation, and further practical studies
have not shown a difference. This has raised troublesome
implementations with a cross-sectional study published in the
British Journal of Medicine in 2019 which found that Muslim
women reported experiencing challenges when wearing
headscarves in ORs and, as well, adopting the BBE policy
[14]. They found that in many instances, these guidelines
infringed on their religious requirements and some respon-
dents were dissuaded from entering surgical specialties pre-
ferring to specialize as a general practitioner due to dress
code matters. This highlights a greater need for evidence-
based guidelines especially when there is a risk of religious
right and personal freedom infringement and a reflexive
impact on reduction in workforce diversity.
946     Y. Essaji et al.

Facial Hair: Clean Shaven and Bearded

A quasi-experimental study published in 2016 by Parry and
colleagues evaluated bacterial shedding between ten clean-­
shaven and ten bearded male OR personnel [15]. They evalu-
ated the subjects conducting several facial expressions while
wearing a mask, unmasked, or wearing a hood. They found
that while wearing a mask, there was no difference in bacte-
rial shed between bearded and clean-shaven personnel. They
also found that disposable hoods did not decrease the
amount of shedding compared with masks alone. A cross-
sectional study to evaluate the presence of bacteria between
clean-shaven and bearded males with 408 subjects published
in 2014 by Wakeam and colleagues found that bacterial shed
rates among both groups were comparable, with the clean-
shaven group having higher colonization rates for
Staphylococcus       aureus     and    methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus [16]. A quasi-experimental study in
2000 by McLure and colleagues further complicated the
limited available evidence as they compared ten clean-
shaven men, ten bearded men, and ten women [17]. They
found that wiggling the mask significantly increased the
bacterial shedding among women and bearded men; how-
ever, this was not the case in the clean-shaven men. They
suggest that bearded men could consider removing their
beards; however, this does not address the surprising results
that women had comparable bacterial shed to bearded men.


Cost

The matter of replacement of OR attire for every case also
contributes to the overall cost of surgery and caring for a
patient. Any cost to the healthcare system as a whole should
be evaluated and efforts made to reduce this where possible.
A retrospective review by Elmously and colleagues published
in the Journal of the American College of Surgeons in 2018
evaluated data from the National Health Safety Network and
         Chapter 49.   OR Attire: Does it Impact Quality?   947

included 30,493 general surgery, cardiac, neurosurgery, ortho-
pedic, and gynecology procedures from January 2014 to
November 2017, before and after implementation of the man-
dated bouffant hats [18]. They showed no difference in rate of
SSIs between groups. The cost of attire for one person enter-
ing the OR increased from $0.07–0.12 before policy change to
$1.11–1.38 after policy change which encompassed not only
disposable surgical hat implementation but also mandated
OR jackets. This was estimated to translate to an increase of
$540 million per year for all US hospitals. Given the high cost
of these implementations, their benefit must be evaluated in
a cost-effectiveness review.


Environmental Waste

The growing impact of global warming has shone a light on
the urgency for reduction of environmental waste. The
healthcare system is the second largest contributor of trash in
the USA with one-third of the four billion pounds of waste
produced by ORs every year [19]. The waste from ORs has
also been shown to translate to increased costs from not only
waste elimination but also the associated increased cost of
disposable materials; one such study showed $100,000 annual
savings with the use of reusable gowns in their surgical center
[20]. A survey conducted by AORN evaluated perioperative
staff preference and demonstrated that the majority of sur-
geons and surgical technologists actually preferred the reus-
able products and they felt this would translate to a 65%
decrease in regulated medical waste generated in the OR and
reduce the cost of waste disposal [21].
   Older studies had suggested that reusable gowns were
inferior to disposable; however, they were using materials
which are now considered obsolete, and more recent studies
on newer materials in use show equivalence in safety. In
simulated OR analysis, disposable bouffant hats were shown
to have greater permeability and microbial shed than dispos-
able skull caps and cloth skull caps. AORN has released a
948   Y. Essaji et al.

statement that donning cloth caps should be determined at
the facility level. These factors taken together suggest that
consideration for system-based assessment of reduction strat-
egies for medical waste may decrease costs while not impact-
ing safety or surgeon preference.


COVID-19 Impact

The COVID-19 pandemic and its uncertainty have resulted in
significant perioperative changes that are constantly in flux as
our understanding of the virus expands. These changes
extend to OR attire as there is increased emphasis on
improved protection for healthcare providers to minimize
transmission of COVID-19. Furthermore, PPE shortages
have created additional constraints on the US healthcare
system, and institutions have had to develop new resource
strategies to meet PPE demands.
   As aerosolization and respiratory droplets are considered
the primary mechanism of transmission for the COVID-19
virus, the use of N95 respirators has been recommended in
addition to standard OR PPE and attire. The ACS and the
CDC have recommended that N95 respirators should be
worn while operating and during aerosol-generating proce-
dures such as intubation for COVID-19 suspected and con-
firmed patients. Many institutions also encourage the use of
N95 respirators during intubation regardless of a patient’s
COVID-19 status due the significance of false-negative test
results.
   PPE recommendations are challenging to follow due to
national and international shortages. Hospitals have
responded to these shortages with strategies that reduce the
use of disposable PPE and reuse PPE when appropriate.
Many institutions now encourage and even provide cloth
scrub hats and non-disposable eye protection. SAGES has
published a rotation and reuse strategy for N95 respirators to
extend their use, and decontamination methods are being
investigated. As OR PPE guidelines continue to evolve, it is
         Chapter 49.   OR Attire: Does it Impact Quality?   949

critical that institutions find innovative ways to protect their
healthcare providers while still maintaining a high level of
care for their patients.


 orrelation of Current Guidelines
C
with Evidence
Since the publication of the controversial AORN Guidelines
for Perioperative Practice in 2015, further revisions have been
made and updated guidelines were published in January 2020.
Considerable changes were made in regard to evidence
appraisal and multidisciplinary input, both key factors that
have been identified as important to successful guideline
­creation and implementation. AORN revised their model for
 evidence appraisal and rating which they published in their
 own journal in 2016. They also published the evidence table
 they created and used to support their guidelines. This aids in
 transparency and building trustworthy guidelines for imple-
 mentation among multidisciplinary healthcare services. One
 notable update in their 2020 guidelines is that some policy
 decisions need to be determined at the facility level such as
 donning cloth caps and what form of head covers are needed.
 They continue to recommend that the scalp and hair are cov-
 ered in restricted or semi-restricted areas. They acknowledge
 that the evidence does not show any association between type
 of head cover worn or extent of hair coverage and SSI rates. As
 well, they repeal the recommendation for covering arms other
 than when performing preoperative patient skin antisepsis.
    When assessing the guidelines from an evidentiary basis,
 there are few guidelines that can be strongly recommended.
 Pragmatically, wearing a surgical gown and mask for scrubbed
 personnel is recommended for prevention of transmission of
 blood-borne pathogens to the surgical team. As well, there is
 building evidence for double-gloving, a recommendation
 from the AORN 2020 guidelines.
    Further research is needed to determine optimal guidelines
 for protecting patients and reducing SSI rates. Medicine and
950   Y. Essaji et al.

in particular ORs already have many regulatory practices. It is
important that efforts are focused on what will make the
greatest impact on patient safety. If recommendations are
made without evidentiary basis and without input from multi-
disciplinary teams, they can contribute to the overburdening
of healthcare workers and physician burnout. Lack of input or
control for physicians with respect to issues affecting their
work lives has been shown to contribute to physician burnout.
Transparency and physician input both help to reduce these
negative effects in regard to guideline formation. A systematic
review and meta-analysis published in Medicine in 2019 by
Garcia and colleagues showed a correlation between high
physician burnout and worse patient safety [22]. They also
suggest that organized workflows that promote health profes-
sionals’ autonomy help to improve patient safety practices.
Another systematic review from England published in 2016
showed that higher levels of physician burnout correlated
with increased medical errors [23]. The largest meta-analysis
to date published in 2017 by Salyers and colleagues included
over 210,000 healthcare providers over 82 studies [24]. They
again showed consistent negative relationships between phy-
sician burnout and perceived quality including patient satis-
faction and the perception of safety. Regulatory guidelines
that include efforts to reduce healthcare worker burnout by
being transparent and involving all involved disciplines, as
outlined in the National Academy of Medicine’s Standards for
Developing Trustworthy Clinical Practice Guidelines summa-
rized in Figs. 49.2 and 49.3, are essential as they produce ben-
efits for patients as well as healthcare workers.


Summary
OR attire offers both protection for healthcare workers from
blood-borne pathogens and infections and protection for
patients from the most common, costly, and morbid hospital-­
acquired infection, SSIs. Expert evidenced-based guidelines
are important in OR attire to maintain and uphold profession-
         Chapter 49.   OR Attire: Does it Impact Quality?   951

alism within the healthcare team. The ACS states that this also
assists in establishing and maintaining the patient-­physician
relationship and upholds the perception of surgeons as highly
trustworthy, attentive, professional, and compassionate.
Establishment of guidelines should be made with a thorough
evaluation of the available evidence and with input from all
healthcare team members to ensure collegiality and adequate
uptake. The AORN 2020 guidelines were created with multi-
disciplinary input and a revised format for review of evidence.
It will take time for uptake of these guidelines as many health-
care facilities made significant changes to adopt the 2015
guidelines and the recommendations will need to be reviewed
at the individual institution level. As well, the COVID-19 pan-
demic has ratified PPE use in the healthcare community and
will have lasting and far-reaching repercussions. Clarity and
engagement are paramount to establishing guidelines. Current
guidelines are based on a combination of very few RCTs and
mostly quasi-­experimental microbial contamination studies as
well as retrospective clinical studies. Many other factors also
contribute to SSIs other than the minimal component of a
small amount of hair exposed on the nape of the neck; there-
fore, optimization of those factors (preoperative antibiotics,
normothermia, postoperative wound care, and dressing
choice) should take precedence. Current surgical attire prac-
tices should also evaluate interventions in the context of their
economic and environmental impact. Lastly, within our multi-
cultural society, guidelines should be reviewed to address any
infringement on religious practices or personal freedoms,
especially when there is lack of proof of benefit. This may help
also reduce the toll on physician and healthcare worker burn-
out in a highly stressful workplace.


References
 1. Adams LW, Aschenbrenner CA, Houle TT, et al. Uncovering
    the history of operating room attire through photographs.
    Anesthesiology. 2016;124(1):19–24.
952    Y. Essaji et al.

 2. Evidenced-Based Medicine Working Group. Evidence-based
    medicine: a new approach to teaching the practice of medicine.
    JAMA. 1992;268(17):2420–5.
 3. Overcash M. A comparison of reusable and disposable perioper-
    ative textiles: sustainability state-of-the-art 2012. Anesth Analg.
    2012;114(5):1055–66.
 4. American College of Surgeons task force on operating
    room attire. Statement on Operating Room Attire. Bulletin
    of the American College of Surgeons website. October 1,
    2016. Accessed Oct 10, 2020. https://bulletin.facs.org/2016/10/
    statement-­on-­operating-­room-­attire/
 5. Allegranz B, Zayed B, Bischoff P, et al. WHO guidelines devel-
    opment group. New WHO recommendations on intraoperative
    and postoperative measures for surgical site infection preven-
    tion: an evidence-based global perspective. Lancet Infect Dis.
    2016;16(12):e288–303.
 6. Haskins IN, Prabhu AS, Krpata DM, et al. Is there an association
    between surgeon hat type and 30-day wound events following
    ventral hernia repair? Hernia. 2017;21(4):495–503.
 7. Shallwani H, Shakir HJ, Aldridge AM, et al. Mandatory change
    from surgical skull caps to bouffant caps among operating room
    personnel does not reduce surgical site infections in class I sur-
    gical cases: a single-center experience with more than 15 000
    patients. Neurosurgery. 2018;82(4):548–54.
 8. Kothari SN, Anderson MJ, Borgert AJ, et al. Bouffant vs skull
    cap and impact on surgical site infection: does operating room
    headwear really matter? J Am Coll Surg. 2018;227(2):198–202.
 9. Markel TA, Gormley T, Greeley D, et al. Hats off: a study of
    different operating room headgear assessed by environmental
    quality indicators. J Am Coll Surg. 2017;225(5):573–81.
10. Lipp A, Edwards P. Disposable surgical face masks: a systematic
    review. Can Oper Room Nurs J. 2005;23(3):20. -1, 24-5, 33-8
11. Vincent M, Edwards P. Disposable surgical face masks for pre-
    venting surgical wound infection in clean surgery. Cochrane
    Database Syst Rev. 2016;4(4):CD002929.
12. Webster J, Croger S, Lister C, et al. Use of face masks by non-­
    scrubbed operating room staff: a randomized controlled trial.
    ANZ J Surg. 2010;80(3):169–73.
          Chapter 49.    OR Attire: Does it Impact Quality?         953

13. Liu Z, Dumville JC, Norman G, et al. Intraoperative interventions
    for preventing surgical site infection: an overview of Cochrane
    reviews. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2018;2(2):CD012653.
14. Malik A, Qureshi H, Abdul-Razakq H, et al. ‘I decided not
    to go into surgery due to dress code’: a cross-sectional study
    within the UK investigating experiences of female Muslim
    medical health professionals on bare below the elbows (BBE)
    policy and wearing headscarves (hijabs) in theatre. BMJ Open.
    2019;9(3):e019954.
15. Parry JA, Karau MJ, Aho JM, et al. To beard or not to
    beard? Bacterial Shedding Among Surgeons Orthopedics.
    2016;39(2):e290–4.
16. Wakeam E, Hernandez RA, Rivera Morales D, et al. Bacterial
    ecology of hospital workers’ facial hair: a cross-sectional study. J
    Hosp Infect. 2014;87(1):63–7.
17. McLure HA, Mannam M, Talboys CA, et al. The effect of facial
    hair and sex on the dispersal of bacteria below a masked subject.
    Anesthesia. 2000;55(2):173–6.
18. Elmously A, Gray KD, Michelassi F, et al. Operating room
    attire policy and healthcare cost: favoring evidence over action
    for prevention of surgical site infections. J Am Coll Surg.
    2019;228(1):98–106.
19. Wormer BA, Augenstein VA, Carpenter CL, et al. The green
    operating room: simple changes to reduce cost and our carbon
    footprint. Am Surg. 2013;79(7):666–71.
20. DiGiacomo JC, Odom JW, Ritota PC, et al. Cost containment in
    the operating room: use of reusable versus disposable clothing.
    Am Surg. 1992;58(10):654–6.
21. Conrardy J, Hillanbrand M, Myers S, et al. Reducing medical
    waste. AORN J. 2010;91(6):711–21.
22. Garcia C, de Abreu LC, Ramos JL, et al. Influence of burnout
    on patient safety: systematic review and meta-analysis. Medicina.
    2019;55(9):553.
23. Hall LH, Johnson J, Watt I, et al. Healthcare staff wellbeing,
    burnout, and patient safety: a systematic review. PLoS One.
    2016;11(7):e0159015.
24. Salyers MP, Bonfils KA, Luther L, et al. The relationship
    between professional burnout and quality and safety in health-
    care: a meta-analysis. J Gen Intern Med. 2017;32(4):475–82.
954    Y. Essaji et al.

Selected Readings
Ban KA, Minei JP, Laronga C, Harbrecht BG, et al. American College
   of Surgeons and Surgical Infection Society: Surgical Site Infection
   Guidelines, 2016 Update. J Am Coll Surg. 2017;224(1):59–74.
Guideline for surgical attire. Guidelines for Perioperative Practice.
   Denver, CO: AORN, Inc.; 2020. p. 989–1006.
Liu Z, Dumville JC, Norman G, et al. Intraoperative interventions
   for preventing surgical site infection: an overview of Cochrane
   Reviews. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2018;2(2):CD012653.
Moalem J, Markel TA, Plagenhoef J, et al. Proceedings and
   Recommendations from the OR Attire Summit: A Collaborative
   Model for Guideline Development. Bulletin of the American
   College of Surgeons website. May 1, 2019. Accessed Oct
   10,    2020.     https://bulletin.facs.org/2019/05/proceedings-­and-­
   recommendations-­from-­the-­or-­attire-­summit-­a-­collaborative-­
   model-­for-­guideline-­development/.
Nash D, Reifsnyder J, Fabius R, et al. Population Health: Creating a
   Culture of Wellness. 3rd ed. Jones & Bartlett Learning. 2010
Spruce L, Van Wicklin SA, Wood A. AORN’s Revised Model for
   Evidence Appraisal and Rating. AORN J. 2016;103(1):60–72.
Chapter 50
Learning When Not
to Operate: From Patient
Selection to Withdraw
of Care
Carolyn Judge, Kim Gerling, and Tiffany C. Cox




Objectives
1. Define consideration of appropriate patient selection and
   when to wait to operate.
2. What are the outcome measures supporting these concepts
   for surgical frailty?
3. Define the problem of care near the end of life.
4. Setting goals of care: who is right?
5. What is medical futility? Is it quantifiable?




C. Judge · K. Gerling · T. C. Cox (*)
Department of Surgery, Uniformed Services University of Health
Sciences & Walter Reed National Military Medical Center,
Bethesda, MD, USA
e-mail: Carolyn.g.judge.mil@mail.mil;
Kimberly.a.gerling3.mil@mail.mil; tiffany.cox@usuhs.edu

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature   955
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_50
956   C. Judge et al.

Introduction
Fundamental adages for surgery that still apply today are
timeless in their expression of the innate nature of our profes-
sion. “Residency is to learn how to operate, not do an opera-
tion.” “Junior residents learn when to operate, Chief residents
learn when NOT to operate.” These concepts have not
changed. Similar to other notions in surgery wherein you
improve your technique over time, learning when not to oper-
ate is a skill. This skill is a responsibility of every mentor to
bestow on their trainees so it can be instilled during training
yet is mastered over years of practice. The tendency is to want
to save everyone with an operation. Unfortunately, knowing
when an operation isn’t the best answer is much harder to
discern. Included herein are considerations of when we need
to rethink if an operation is the next appropriate step, from
selection of patients and appropriate delay in timing of an
operation. Whether for intentions of improved outcomes
when delayed or never performed at all such as when to enact
the provision of less care, this chapter will discuss when not
operating is ultimately the more appropriate choice.


Patient Selection: When to Wait First, Operate
 Later
There are many dynamic patient characteristics that have a
significant impact on surgical risk and prognosis. These fac-
tors include, but are not limited to, smoking, diabetes, and
obesity, all of which have been linked to increased postopera-
tive morbidity and mortality. Preoperative optimization of
these factors can not only decrease complications but also
decrease hospital charges secondary to minimizing rates of
readmission and reoperation. Surgeons must also consider
women of childbearing age in their patient selection for elec-
tive surgery. Hernia surgery is one of the best evidence-based
examples to prove the case of consideration of delay of sur-
gery until optimization of high-risk comorbidities.
     Chapter 50. Learning When Not to Operate: From…         957

Smoking

Tobacco use carries a 2.49 relative risk of wound complica-
tions [1]. Tobacco use increases the risk of surgical site infec-
tions [2] and specifically mesh infections following hernia
repair [3]. It is also associated with increased readmission and
reoperation rates [4]. The pathophysiologic relationship
between smoking and poor wound healing is complex and
remains to be fully elucidated. It has been shown, however,
that decreased cutaneous blood flow to the wound bed causes
tissue hypoxia [5, 6], reducing the migration of fibroblasts and
the response of inflammatory cells leading to decreased
wound healing [2]. Cessation is effective in reducing postop-
erative complications [7] even in just 4 weeks [8–10]; improved
tissue oxygenation and reduced inflammatory cell response
can be seen within a month of quitting smoking [2]. It is rec-
ommended to postpone surgery until cessation can be
achieved. It should be considered to not perform elective
surgery on actively smoking patients should the potential
morbidity make the procedure maleficent to the patient and
the patient is unwilling to cease tobacco use. If there is any
doubt regarding compliance with smoking cessation, a urine
test is available which detects cotinine, a metabolite of nico-
tine, suggesting tobacco use within 40 hours prior [11].


Obesity

The prevalence of obesity in the United States was 42.4%
from 2017 to 2018 and has increased annually as has the
prevalence of obesity-related type II diabetes [12]. Hernia
recurrence increases for patients with obesity [13–15] which
is higher risk as the BMI increases [16–20]. This recurrence
may be precipitated by surgical site infection (SSI) which are
known to be more common in the obese population. A step-
wise increase in SSI with increasing BMI beginning at a
threshold of 24.2 kg/m2 has been observed [21]. Minimizing
SSI is paramount to avoiding the “vicious cycle” of hernia
958   C. Judge et al.

repair, complication, recurrence, and reoperation [22]. A
BMI ≥40 is an independent risk factor for readmission [4],
increased risk of SSI [21], as well as hernia recurrence [15].
The etiology of SSI in patients with obesity may be due to
increased intra-abdominal pressure [23] or decreased vascu-
larity of adipose tissue [24]. Surgeons are advised to avoid
elective repair in patients with a BMI 50 kg/m2 or greater [25]
in the elective setting. Preoperative BMI optimization may
help decrease complications leading to recurrence for hernias
or necessitating reoperation and ultimately greatly increasing
hospital costs.


Diabetes

Patients with diabetes have increased postoperative morbid-
ity and mortality during elective surgery [18, 26–30]. Increasing
severity of disease has been correlated with increased risk of
complications, increased length of stay, and greater inpatient
charges overall [31]. Current data suggest a HbA1c ≤7.2 sig-
nificantly decreased postoperative morbidity [18]. Diabetics
are 7.25 times more likely to develop an SSI than nondiabetic
patients, and uncontrolled diabetic patients are 3.25 times
more likely to develop an SSI than patients with controlled
diabetes [26]. This may be due to increased blood glucose
level impairing blood flow through the small vessels and com-
promising mobilization and phagocytic activity of leukocytes,
thereby increasing risk of infection [32]. In a study of the
effect of varying severity of diabetes on open ventral hernia
repair outcomes, it was shown that diabetics (both insulin
dependent and non-insulin dependent) had increased com-
plications as compared to nondiabetic patients [31]. Diabetic
patients should be counseled to improve disease control as
reflected by a lower hemoglobin A1c level as this has been
shown to directly impact their postoperative course.
     Chapter 50. Learning When Not to Operate: From…         959

Multiple Comorbidities and Cost

Patients with comorbidities including diabetes, smoking, and
obesity are more likely to have postoperative complications
and generate higher hospital charges than those without [18,
33]. This effect is directly correlated with an increasing num-
ber of these comorbidities [33]. According to the American
Society of Metabolic and Bariatric Surgeons, the combination
of morbid obesity and smoking is linked to an increased risk
of postoperative marginal ulceration and pneumonia [34].
Similarly, morbidly obese patients have an increased postop-
erative sepsis rate of 1% increased risk per pack-year of
smoking [35].
   Hospital charges, which need to be considered as part of
patient counseling for an elective procedure, have also been
shown to be higher in patients with multiple comorbidities
[33]. In fact, patients with these aforementioned comorbidi-
ties but without complications still have higher hospital
charges than patients without comorbidities who do not have
a complication after surgery [33]. This has been seen in other
studies as well, increasing the cost with readmission for
actively smoking patients with obesity resulting in a rate of
25% readmission following elective hernia repair [4].
   In the elective setting, patient selection and surgical timing
should reflect the efficacy of preoperative optimization from
associated high-risk comorbidities for these quality outcome
concerns. It is prudent to delay surgical intervention
otherwise.


Women of Child-Bearing Age

There is limited data on the operative management of hernias
in pregnancy and 30-day outcomes. This void is compounded
by the fact that what data there is within the American
College of Surgeons National Surgical Quality Improvement
Program (ACS-NSQIP) database does not include gesta-
tional age and trimester. Primary ventral hernia repair in
960   C. Judge et al.

women occurs with a bimodal distribution peaking at age 5
and again at 35–40 [36], and femoral hernia incidence
increases after age of 30 [37]. Pregnancy itself has been
proven to be a risk factor for hernia recurrence [38, 39]. The
relative incidence of hernia presentation during pregnancy is
quite low as was demonstrated in a study of 20,714 pregnant
patients, of which 17 (0.08%) and 25 (0.12%) have primary
ventral and groin hernias, respectively; none of the patients
underwent elective or emergent repair during pregnancy and
all had uncomplicated childbirth [40]. Watchful waiting for
reducible hernias in pregnancy is recommended [40] with
plan to proceed to surgical repair in the postpartum period
should symptoms develop or persist. The presence of a hernia
does not appear to negatively affect the pregnancy, labor, or
delivery, and there exists the possibility for misdiagnosis of
round ligament varicosities as a hernia [41]. The decision to
proceed to surgery must be made after consideration of the
risk of progression to bowel incarceration and strangulation
weighed against the risk of maternal and fetal physiologic
stress and teratogenic exposures [42]. It is important to
ensure that elective surgical repair is performed at a hospital
with neonatal capabilities as the risk of preterm labor in the
pregnant surgical patient is 4% [43]. Additionally, it is recom-
mended to postpone surgery until the second trimester and to
use local or regional anesthesia if possible [44]. The consider-
ation of waiting for surgery after childbearing age for elective
hernia cases is well supported for improved quality
outcomes.


End-of-Life Care: First, Do no Harm
While delaying an operation can be difficult, deciding not to
operate on a patient is even more challenging. This decision
is further complicated when we realize that this will ulti-
mately lead to the patient’s demise. Often, surgeons are used
to working in the “black and white”; there is a sense that our
technical skills can sustain life. Early in a surgeon’s career, the
    Chapter 50. Learning When Not to Operate: From…        961

end result may lead to a sense of guilt or failure. However,
there will be a time when surgery is futile and may result in
more harm than good. How do we decide where to draw that
line? How do we tell patients and their families that we can-
not offer a surgical intervention? How do we train future
surgeons to know how and when to have that conversation?
The ability to communicate risks and benefits of surgery to
patients is becoming increasingly more important, as almost
a third of Americans over the age of 65 undergo a surgical
procedure in the last year of life, with a majority of those
procedures in the last month of life [45]. This highlights the
need to be able to master communicating options within the
context of a critically ill or dying patients and the consider-
ation of how to communicate when the choice not to operate
is what is best for their care.
    In order to communicate these options clearly, it is impor-
tant to address why end-of-life care is difficult to discuss.
Even in the most ideal situations, patient-physician commu-
nication is fraught with potential barriers, and end-of-life
discussions are no different. Counseling patients on the dying
process is inherently complex because it is more often than
not a high-stress, emotionally charged event. Patients and
their caregivers or families may feel a sense of unfinished
business or finality, or they may have expectations of how
their death should occur, even if these expectations are not
aligned with the reality of what medical care can offer.
Patient and caregiver concerns include a lack of understand-
ing of the true complexities of their medical illness, possibly
related to low health literacy or prior medical experiences.
Sometimes patients anchor on their prior experiences and
think that their current situation is the same as all of their
other hospitalizations, even though they may be much more
ill than during previous presentations. Their barriers of com-
munication can include the patient’s incapacity, absence of
advanced directives, and failure to assign a surrogate for
decision-making [46]. These concerns are further hindered by
factors inherent to the surgeon, including prognostic uncer-
tainty, inexperience with palliative care, time constraints, or
962   C. Judge et al.

their personal bias [46]. Additionally, system-based barriers
such as limited availability of experts in palliation, frag-
mented information across multiple healthcare systems, and
clinical inexperience at various institutions may also play a
role [47]. All of these factors may confound the decision to
operate and the ability to clearly communicate when an
operation is not the answer.
   Eliminating these barriers completely is not possible; how-
ever, we can improve communication techniques to benefit
both the patient and the physician. Physicians should not
always think of end-of-life discussions as a singular occur-
rence [48]. In an ideal world, discussions of possible outcomes
and scenarios related to end-of-life care would occur in an
outpatient setting. This allows for multiple conversations
which could consider situations such as social support at
home and earlier involvement of palliative care. Unfortunately,
given the nature of many surgical interventions, these conver-
sations tend to occur in an expedited manner without pre-
amble or prior relationships. Time to develop relationships
and establish the intimate familiarity is a luxury not often
afforded to the surgeon on call. If at all possible, it’s impor-
tant to separate the “breaking of bad news” discussion from
the “goals of care” discussion, as this allows the patient and
their family time to process the context in which a decision
regarding end-of-life care will be made [49]. This includes
both the acute illness and change in status within the context
of the patient’s underlying medical conditions. This is often
an overlooked step with many surgeons avoiding statements
asserting poor prognosis with or without an intervention [49].
   The patient’s wishes are critical input to a discussion about
treatment options near the end of life. Failure of goal-­
concordant care is considered in the palliative care literature
as a medical error, and high-quality communication is the
highest priority to achieve this goal [50]. For patients with
chronic illness or a protracted clinical course, this conversa-
tion would occur in a more consistent setting with a physician
that has developed rapport with the patient and their family.
This is not often the case, and in the surgical community in
    Chapter 50. Learning When Not to Operate: From…        963

times of critical care, this key component of goal concordance
is lost without high-quality communication in situations of
provision of less care or withdraw of care [50].
    As a medical community, we assign significant weight to
patient autonomy as it pertains to medical decision-making.
In this context, this allows the patient to make an informed
decision that further surgical treatment no longer meets their
overarching goals. It also allows the patient to make decisions
where the expected benefits from invasive surgical interven-
tion no longer outweigh the potential harms and the empha-
sis of importance that the patient can come to this decision
autonomously with proper counseling. Sometimes, this option
not to intervene aligns with the physician’s consensus. When
it does not, surgeons cannot lean into the “rescue credo” that
frameworks the conversation with the worst outcome equal-
ing death [47]. It is imperative that surgeons express to
patients and families that selection of nonoperative manage-
ment does not equate to giving up. Furthermore, it is critical
to convey that recommending nonoperative management
does not mean that the physician team is abandoning the
patient or their family [48]. This concern can be mitigated via
consideration of follow-up with the patient even after the
decision has been made to not undergo further surgical treat-
ment and establishment of ongoing psychosocial care by con-
necting the patient with the appropriate teams, most
significantly palliative care.
    Even when death is inevitable and surgical intervention is
futile, what we can do is continue to advocate for the patient.
Early consultation of palliative care has been shown to
improve patient’s quality of life [51]. There is perception
among surgical residents, and likely their mentors, that the
palliative team does not need to be consulted until death is
imminent or there are no more options for cure [52]. This is
an incorrect assumption which is harmful to patients at the
time in which they need medical counseling the most. The
fact that metastatic cancer patients are four times more likely
to have a fatal outcome from their admission than cohort
matched cases excluding the cancer diagnosis [53] demon-
964   C. Judge et al.

strates we are subjecting patients to end of life within the
confines of the hospital and late palliation is not sufficient.
Many patients and physicians alike fear a sense of betrayal
with consultation of a palliative team. There is a belief that
consultation is equivalent to hospice care or, even worse, that
this signifies end-of-care. In fact, patients who receive pallia-
tive care consultation perceive their end-of-life care more
favorably than those who did not [54]. Despite the likely
benefit to palliative care consultation, even among patients
undergoing high-risk surgeries, only 3.5% received consulta-
tion [54]. Surgical practices should consider routine involve-
ment of palliative care consultation where early engagement
of the palliative team normalizes their involvement for
patients prior to critical decision points.


Conclusion
When not to operate is a critical skill mastered at the cross-
roads of the art and science of medicine. Physicians have a
responsibility to their patients to elicit their values in an
ongoing dialogue of shared decision-making with proper
counseling of their risks. As we move the needle from under-
standing to mastery, it is our responsibility to make the harder
recommendation regarding when an operation should be
delayed or not performed at all. When considering what we
know about quality outcomes for patients with multiple
comorbidities or impacting patient factors, we should con-
sider preoperative optimization and delay surgical
­intervention in the elective setting. Patients must be appropri-
 ately risk stratified with awareness of the risk for increased
 morbidity, mortality, and healthcare costs on an individual
 basis. It is paramount that physicians continue actively engag-
 ing patients who are not yet surgical candidates or should not
 undergo surgery at all in situations requiring provision of less
 care so that they do not feel abandoned. Education in pallia-
 tive care and ready integration of these services into surgical
     Chapter 50. Learning When Not to Operate: From…              965

practice is essential in understanding how to manage patients
necessitating withdraw of care.
   The implicit trust patients place in their physicians must be
ethically employed to balance our recommendations and
patient autonomy such that patients feel supported and
empowered to make informed decisions. Patients need to
understand when not operating may be better aligned with
their care goals. It is upon us to counsel patients in this man-
ner and train the future of surgery to do the same.

Disclosure The views and opinions expressed herein are that of the
authors and do not represent the opinions of the US Army, US Navy, or
that of the DOD.



References
 1. Gronkjaer M, Eliasen M, Skov-Ettrup LS, et al. Preoperative
    smoking status and postoperative complications: a systematic
    review and meta-analysis. Ann Surg. 2014;259(1):52–71.
 2. Sorensen LT. Wound healing and infection in surgery: the
    pathophysiological impact of smoking, smoking cessation, and
    nicotine replacement therapy: a systematic review. Ann Surg.
    2012;255(6):1069–79.
 3. Novitsky YW, Porter JR, Rucho ZC, et al. Open preperitoneal
    retrofascial mesh repair for multiply recurrent ventral incisional
    hernias. J Am Coll Surg. 2006;203(3):283–9.
 4. Henriksen NA, Bisgaard T, Helgstrand F. Smoking and obesity
    are associated with increased readmission after elective repair
    of small primary ventral hernias: a nationwide database study.
    Surgery. 2020;168(3):527–31.
 5. Monfrecola G, Riccio G, Savarese C, Posteraro G, Procaccini
    EM. The acute effect of smoking on cutaneous microcirculation
    blood flow in habitual smokers and nonsmokers. Dermatology.
    1998;197(2):115–8.
 6. Arnold DL, Williams MA, Miller RS, Qiu C, Sorensen TK. Iron
    deficiency anemia, cigarette smoking and risk of abruptio pla-
    centae. J Obstet Gynaecol Res. 2009;35(3):446–52.
 7. Rosen MJ, Krpata DM, Ermlich B, Blatnik JA. A 5-year clinical
    experience with single-staged repairs of infected and contami-
966      C. Judge et al.

      nated abdominal wall defects utilizing biologic mesh. Ann Surg.
      2013;257(6):991–6.
 8.   Finan KR, Vick CC, Kiefe CI, Neumayer L, Hawn MT. Predictors
      of wound infection in ventral hernia repair. Am J Surg.
      2005;190(5):676–81.
 9.   Lindstrom D, Sadr Azodi O, Wladis A, et al. Effects of a periop-
      erative smoking cessation intervention on postoperative compli-
      cations: a randomized trial. Ann Surg. 2008;248(5):739–45.
10.   Sorensen LT, Karlsmark T, Gottrup F. Abstinence from smok-
      ing reduces incisional wound infection: a randomized controlled
      trial. Ann Surg. 2003;238(1):1–5.
11.   Cooke F, Bullen C, Whittaker R, McRobbie H, Chen MH, Walker
      N. Diagnostic accuracy of NicAlert cotinine test strips in saliva for
      verifying smoking status. Nicotine Tob Res. 2008;10(4):607–12.
12.   CDC. Obesity is a Common, Serious, and Costly Disease. https://
      www.cdc.gov/obesity/data/adult.html. Last Accessed 1JAN2021.
      29 JUNE 2020.
13.   Schumacher OP, Peiper C, Lorken M, Schumpelick V. Long-­
      term results after Spitzy's umbilical hernia repair. Chirurg.
      2003;74(1):50–4.
14.   Venclauskas L, Silanskaite J, Kiudelis M. Umbilical hernia: factors
      indicative of recurrence. Medicina (Kaunas). 2008;44(11):855–9.
15.   Stey AM, Russell MM, Sugar CA, et al. Extending the value
      of the National Surgical Quality Improvement Program claims
      dataset to study long-term outcomes: rate of repeat ventral her-
      nia repair. Surgery. 2015;157(6):1157–65.
16.   Tsereteli Z, Pryor BA, Heniford BT, Park A, Voeller G, Ramshaw
      BJ. Laparoscopic ventral hernia repair (LVHR) in morbidly
      obese patients. Hernia : the Journal of Hernias and Abdominal
      Wall Surgery. 2008;12(3):233–8.
17.   Ko JH,Wang EC, Salvay DM, Paul BC, Dumanian GA. Abdominal
      wall reconstruction: lessons learned from 200 "components sep-
      aration" procedures. Arch Surg. 2009;144(11):1047–55.
18.   Colavita P, Zemlyak A, Burton P, et al. The expansive cost of
      wound complications after ventral hernia repair. Washington
      DC: Am College Surg Meeting; 2013.
19.   Desai KA, Razavi SA, Hart AM, Thompson PW, Losken A. The
      effect of BMI on outcomes following complex Abdominal Wall
      reconstructions. Ann Plast Surg. 2016;76(Suppl 4):S295–7.
20.   Sauerland S, Korenkov M, Kleinen T, Arndt M, Paul A. Obesity
      is a risk factor for recurrence after incisional hernia repair.
       Chapter 50. Learning When Not to Operate: From…             967

      Hernia: The Journal of Hernias and Abdominal Wall Surgery.
      2004;8(1):42–6.
21.   Park H, de Virgilio C, Kim DY, Shover AL, Moazzez A. Effects
      of smoking and different BMI cutoff points on surgical site
      infection after elective open ventral hernia repair. Hernia: The
      Journal of Hernias and Abdominal Wall Surgery. 2020.
22.   Holihan JL, Alawadi Z, Martindale RG, et al. Adverse events
      after ventral hernia repair: the vicious cycle of complications. J
      Am Coll Surg. 2015;221(2):478–85.
23.   Sugerman H, Windsor A, Bessos M, Wolfe L. Intra-abdominal
      pressure, sagittal abdominal diameter and obesity comorbidity. J
      Intern Med. 1997;241(1):71–9.
24.   Pierpont YN, Dinh TP, Salas RE, et al. Obesity and surgical
      wound healing: a current review. ISRN Obes. 2014;2014:638936.
25.   MK, Liang JLH, Itani K, et al. Ventral hernia management:
      expert consensus guided by systematic review. Annals Surg.
      2016(Published online 15MAR2016).
26.   Novitsky YW, Orenstein SB. Effect of patient and hospital char-
      acteristics on outcomes of elective ventral hernia repair in the
      United States. Hernia: The Journal of Hernias and Abdominal
      Wall Surgery. 2013;17(5):639–45.
27.   Hornby ST, McDermott FD, Coleman M, et al. Female gen-
      der and diabetes mellitus increase the risk of recurrence after
      laparoscopic incisional hernia repair. Ann R Coll Surg Engl.
      2015;97(2):115–9.
28.   Shah BR, Hux JE. Quantifying the risk of infectious diseases for
      people with diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2003;26(2):510–3.
29.   Fischer JP, Wink JD, Tuggle CT, Nelson JA, Kovach SJ. Wound
      risk assessment in ventral hernia repair: generation and inter-
      nal validation of a risk stratification system using the ACS-­
      NSQIP. Hernia: The Journal of Hernias and Abdominal Wall
      Surgery. 2015;19(1):103–11.
30.   Asolati M, Huerta S, Sarosi G, Harmon R, Bell C, Anthony
      T. Predictors of recurrence in veteran patients with umbilical
      hernia: single center experience. Am J Surg. 2006;192(5):627–30.
31.   Huntington C, Gamble J, Blair L, et al. Quantification of the
      effect of diabetes mellitus on ventral hernia repair: results from
      two National Registries. Am Surg. 2016;82(8):661–71.
32.   Casqueiro J, Casqueiro J, Alves C. Infections in patients with
      diabetes mellitus: a review of pathogenesis. Indian J Endocrinol
      Metab. 2012;16(Suppl 1):S27–36.
968    C. Judge et al.

33. Cox TC, Blair LJ, Huntington CR, et al. The cost of preventable
    comorbidities on wound complications in open ventral hernia
    repair. J Surg Res. 2016;206(1):214–22.
34. Mechanick JI, Youdim A, Jones DB, et al. Clinical practice guide-
    lines for the perioperative nutritional, metabolic, and nonsurgical
    support of the bariatric surgery patient--2013 update: cospon-
    sored by American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists,
    The Obesity Society, and American Society for Metabolic &
    Bariatric Surgery. Obesity (Silver Spring, Md). 2013;21(Suppl
    1):S1–27.
35. Blair LJ, Huntington CR, Cox TC, et al. Risk factors for post-
    operative sepsis in laparoscopic gastric bypass. Surg Endosc.
    2016;30(4):1287–93.
36. Burcharth J, Pedersen MS, Pommergaard HC, Bisgaard T,
    Pedersen CB, Rosenberg J. The prevalence of umbilical and
    epigastric hernia repair: a nationwide epidemiologic study.
    Hernia: The Journal of Hernias and Abdominal Wall Surgery.
    2015;19(5):815–9.
37. Burcharth J, Pedersen M, Bisgaard T, Pedersen C, Rosenberg
    J. Nationwide prevalence of groin hernia repair. PLoS One.
    2013;8(1):e54367.
38. Lappen JR, Sheyn D, Hackney DN. Does pregnancy increase the
    risk of abdominal hernia recurrence after prepregnancy surgical
    repair? Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2016;215(3):390 e391–5.
39. Oma E, Jensen KK, Jorgensen LN. Increased risk of ventral
    hernia recurrence after pregnancy: a nationwide register-based
    study. Am J Surg. 2017;214(3):474–8.
40. Oma E, Bay-Nielsen M, Jensen KK, Jorgensen LN, Pinborg
    A, Bisgaard T. Primary ventral or groin hernia in pregnancy: a
    cohort study of 20,714 women. Hernia: The Journal of Hernias
    and Abdominal Wall Surgery. 2017;21(3):335–9.
41. Lechner M, Fortelny R, Ofner D, Mayer F. Suspected inguinal
    hernias in pregnancy--handle with care! Hernia: The Journal of
    Hernias and Abdominal Wall Surgery. 2014;18(3):375–9.
42. Buch KE, Tabrizian P, Divino CM. Management of hernias in
    pregnancy. J Am Coll Surg. 2008;207(4):539–42.
43. Cohen-Kerem R, Railton C, Oren D, Lishner M, Koren
    G. Pregnancy outcome following non-obstetric surgical inter-
    vention. Am J Surg. 2005;190(3):467–73.
44. Van De Velde M, De Buck F. Anesthesia for non-obstetric surgery
    in the pregnant patient. Minerva Anestesiol. 2007;73(4):235–40.
     Chapter 50. Learning When Not to Operate: From…            969

45. Kwok AC, Semel ME, Lipsitz SR, et al. The intensity and varia-
    tion of surgical care at the end of life: a retrospective cohort
    study. Lancet (London, England). 2011;378(9800):1408–13.
46. Diaz MR. Barriers to high quality end of life Care in the
    Surgical Intensive Care Unit. Am J Hosp Palliat Care.
    2020;1049909120969970
47. Cooper Z, Koritsanszky LA, Cauley CE, et al. Recommendations
    for best communication practices to facilitate goal-concordant
    Care for Seriously ill Older Patients with Emergency Surgical
    Conditions. Ann Surg. 2016;263(1):1–6.
48. Wancata LM, Hinshaw DB. Rethinking autonomy: decision
    making between patient and surgeon in advanced illnesses.
    Annals translat Med. 2016;4(4):77.
49. Taylor LJ, Johnson SK, Nabozny MJ, et al. Barriers to goal-­
    concordant Care for Older Patients with Acute Surgical Illness:
    communication patterns extrinsic to decision aids. Ann Surg.
    2018;267(4):677–82.
50. Sanders JJ, Curtis JR, Tulsky JA. Achieving goal-concordant care:
    a conceptual model and approach to measuring serious illness
    communication and its impact. J Palliat Med. 2018;21(S2):S17–27.
51. Kelley AS, Morrison RS. Palliative Care for the Seriously ill. N
    Engl J Med. 2015;373(8):747–55.
52. Suwanabol PA, Vitous CA, Perumalswami CR, et al. Surgery
    Residents' experiences with seriously-ill and dying patients: an
    opportunity to improve palliative and end-of-life care. J Surg
    Educ. 2020;77(3):582–97.
53. Majdinasab EJ, Puckett Y, Pei KY. Increased in-hospital mor-
    tality and emergent cases in patients with stage IV cancer.
    Supportive care in cancer : official journal of the Multinational
    Association of Supportive Care in Cancer. 2020.
54. Yefimova M, Aslakson RA, Yang L, et al. Palliative care and
    end-of-life outcomes following high-risk surgery. JAMA Surg.
    2020;155(2):138–46.
Chapter 51
The Changing Paradigm
in Acute Care Surgery:
Who Is the Best to Offer
the Care?
Freeman Condon and Robert Lim




Introduction
Emergency general surgery (EGS) patients constitute a par-
ticularly high-risk group of surgical candidates who suffer
disproportionate morbidity and mortality rates compared to
non-emergency patients undergoing similar procedures [1–3].
This may seem unsurprising as EGS patients tend to be older,
sicker, and frailer than their elective counterparts [4, 5].
Nonetheless, EGS patients remain at increased risk of mor-
bidity even after controlling for these factors [6, 7]. The data
suggests emergency procedures convey increased risk of their
own accord. As life expectancies extend and the population
ages, an increased burden of emergency surgical care can be


F. Condon
Tripler Army Medical Center, Honolulu, HI, USA
R. Lim (*)
University of Oklahoma School of Medicine Tulsa, Tulsa, OK, USA
e-mail: Robert-lim@ouhsc.edu

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature   971
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_51
972   F. Condon and R. Lim

anticipated. It is vital, therefore, to find ways to improve care
of this vulnerable population.


What’s in a Name?
In 2003, the American Association of the Surgery for Trauma
(AAST) began to define acute care surgery (ACS). They
envisioned an evolution of the subspecialty of trauma and
surgical critical care (SCC) which would formally subsume
expertise in EGS [8]. Specific ACS fellowships emerged in
2008. Some of these programs arose from existing SCC pro-
grams, while others were created de novo. There remains
significant heterogeneity among the 1- or 2-year fellowships
in SCC, trauma/SCC, and ACS; and the American Board of
Medical Specialties does not recognize a specific subspecialty
in ACS, or trauma surgery for that matter [9]. Proponents of
an ACS model of care suggest that concentrating emergency
surgical care into the hands of subject matter experts will
allow for the development of expertise and improve out-
comes. Additionally, the ACS surgeon who is on-call for that
particular day generally has no other clinical obligations, like
an elective OR schedule or clinic, which would take away
their ability to see patients with emergent conditions. Further,
the on-call ACS surgeon would be able to operate readily at
all hours without fear of commitments the following day.
These factors would make the ACS surgeon, and likely the
operating room, more efficient. Since the establishment of
ACS services in 2003, many centers have adopted such mod-
els for the care of trauma, EGS, and SCC patients.


The Existing Standards
While ACS models are gaining popularity in busy urban
medical centers and academic hospitals, the traditional model
of a general surgeon on-call (GSOC) remains the most com-
    Chapter 51. The Changing Paradigm in Acute Care…           973

mon paradigm nationwide. A recent Joint Commission survey
found that only 16% of hospitals with an emergency depart-
ment and operating room utilize an ACS service [10].
Surgeons responsible for emergency care under the tradi-
tional GSOC model may be a blend of community general
surgeons or academic fellowship-trained subspecialists.
Surgeons in the traditional model tend to maintain an elec-
tive practice and frequently have pre-scheduled daytime
obligations following a night on call. Criticism of this model
focuses on the absence of required training in the care of
critically ill surgical patients as well as the potential for acute
care and elective practice patients competing for a surgeon’s
attention during a day on call and the day after call. GSOC
systems frequently alternate clinical responsibility for ACS
consults every 24-hour period. Formal ACS systems often
utilize 12-hour shifts, 24-hour, or even weekly call responsibil-
ity during which the surgeon on call is responsible for ACS
presentations and little if anything else. The scope of ACS
teams is not standardized nationally, and there is variability
as to whether the ACS team acts in conjunction with, along-
side, or in addition to the trauma service.


Heartening Signs
Early data from institutions that have converted to an ACS
model are encouraging. The implementation of ACS pro-
grams has been demonstrated to reduce complications and
shorten hospital stays [11]. In one series, mortality was
reduced by a staggering 31% under an ACS model versus the
previous GSOC standard [12]. Costs overall have also been
reduced, likely by way of shortened inpatient stays [13, 14].
Patients with appendicitis had shorter times from ED
­presentation to surgery and lower rates of perforation when
 care was provided by ACS surgeons [15]. Such trends suggest
 a tremendous potential for improvements in national EGS
 outcomes if ACS models were widely implemented.
974   F. Condon and R. Lim

Nonoperative Contributors to ACS Success
Specialty trained surgeons and operative care are vital com-
ponents of the ACS model, but they are not the only piece of
the equation. Outside of emergency operative expertise, one
reason for improved outcomes in the ACS model may be
familiarity with and formal training in critical care. EGS
patients are more likely to require ICU-level care including
mechanical ventilation and continuous renal replacement
therapy than similar elective surgery patients [16]. Multiple
recent studies have suggested that “closed” ICU management
(i.e., care in which the critical care physician is the primary
physician and the surgeon functions as a consultant) also
results in superior outcomes [17–19]. Advocates for “open”
ICUs argue that this model disrupts the continuity of the
patient’s care and may sideline the surgeon who has intimate
knowledge of their patient’s pathology. Formally trained ACS
surgeons may, therefore, offer a “best of both worlds” sce-
nario. An ACS surgeon with formal training in SCC may
admit and operate on an EGS patient and continue to care
for that patient as an intensivist in the postoperative period
in a closed surgical ICU. Indeed, a national survey demon-
strated that 93% of critically ill EGS patients were cared for
in a surgical ICU in institutions with ACS models compared
with 45% in those using a GSOC model.
    Beyond the care of the operative surgeon, ACS models
depend on robust non-physician staffing. The same national
survey found that ACS hospitals are more likely to have over-
night in-house scrub techs, OR nurses, and recovery room
nurses [20]. A retrospective review of ACS outcomes found
decreased mortality in EGS was associated not only with an
in-house surgeon but also independently associated with
in-­
­   house overnight recovery room nursing [21]. Drawing
from the experiences of the surgical community, anesthesiol-
ogy has experienced a similar recent push for specialists in
“acute care anesthesia” [22, 23]. These trends suggest, unsur-
prisingly, that building effective ACS systems relies on multi-
disciplinary and institutional commitments to improving
    Chapter 51. The Changing Paradigm in Acute Care…       975

EGS patients and not simply specializing the training of sur-
geons. Such a paradigm has proven effective in the care of
trauma patients, for whom specialized team care has been
accepted as a national standard in recent decades.


Obstacles to ACS Implementation
Despite the encouraging data, ACS models are a long way
from being adopted as a national standard. This is likely due
to multiple factors. The biggest obstacle to broad ACS adop-
tion is a lack of surgeon availability. ACS models, as envi-
sioned by the AAST, rely on a robust pool of surgeons with
formal fellowship-level training in ACS. Currently, such a
cohort of surgeons does not exist, and indeed a critical short-
age of trauma and SCC surgeons is anticipated [24]. This
shortage coincides with a larger shortage of surgeons in all
subspecialties [25].
    In addition to a surgeon shortage, many community hospi-
tals only have three or four general surgeons, and there isn’t
enough case volume to justify adding more surgeons to only
cover the ACS business. Indeed only 7% of ACS fellowship-­
trained surgeons work in a rural setting. The current portrait
of ACS in the United States is a familiar map in which the
coasts and urban centers have a relatively high proportion of
ACS model institutions, but rural, poor, and less educated
regions continue to operate under a traditional model [26].
    Another potential hurdle to ACS adoption is a concern
that ACS surgeons will take operative volume away from the
non-ACS general surgeons. Such a diversion of cases has
implications for experience and reimbursement. Fortunately,
several studies examining this problem have found that
­emergency volume diverted from non-ACS general surgeons
 is quickly recouped with elective caseload [27, 28]. Moreover,
 increased productivity and job satisfaction have been seen
 with the ACS model [29]. These data suggest that coverage of
 EGS with an ACS model is a non-zero-sum game: ACS sur-
 geons are not stealing pieces of a finite pie of surgical
976   F. Condon and R. Lim

patients. In fact, there are an estimated 6.5 surgeons per
100,000 patients in settings where there are ACS surgeons,
but 4.7 surgeons per 100,000 patients in rural settings. This
would suggest that in an urban setting where there is no
decrease in productivity with an ACS model, there would be
an increase in productivity in underserved areas with an ACS
model.


Who Is the Expert?
With the emergence of ACS as a specialty, the question has
arisen asking if the ACS surgeon is a jack of all trades but a
master of none. Detractors of the model argue that subspe-
cialist surgeons will always remain the experts in their field,
emergency or no. There is some data to support this concern.
Surgeons with specific bariatric training, for example, when
compared to those without, are more likely to utilize laparos-
copy and have shorter length of stay in obese EGS patients
[30]. Elsewhere, it has been demonstrated that emergent
laparotomies are less morbid when performed by a surgeon
with training that reflects that pathology in question [31]. In
other words, laparotomies for perforated diverticulitis are
best performed by colorectal surgeons, while those for perfo-
rated duodenal ulcers are best performed by foregut sur-
geons. Nonetheless, there is evidence that continues to
support the role of ACS in these situations. In one series, the
availability of an acute care surgeon decreased mortality in
emergent colon surgery [32]. Indeed there is also data show-
ing that patients who require emergent colectomy have simi-
lar outcomes when performed by ACS surgeons as compared
to colleagues who routinely perform elective resections [33].
Again, it is not only the individual surgeon who improves the
EGS patient’s outcome but rather the system with a support-
ive administration, appropriate levels of nursing, and in-­
house 24-hour availability of a surgical team that improves
the patient’s chances of survival and decreased morbidity.
    Chapter 51. The Changing Paradigm in Acute Care…        977

 lternative Means to ACS with Finite
A
Resources
Given the disconnect between the need and availability of
ACS surgeons to staff a national transition to an ACS model,
two potential options have been proposed. The first is a sys-
tem used widely in Canada, which in essence combines the
surgical manpower of the GSOC model with the dedicated
call time of ACS [34]. Under this system, general and subspe-
cialty surgeons take 1 week of rotating ACS call during which
they have no elective responsibilities, followed by a period of
time in which they may focus on their elective practice with
no concern for cases that require emergent attention.
Although this system removes the potential for competing
strains on a surgeon’s attention, it fails to achieve the chief
benefit espoused by advocates of ACS, namely, dedicated
training and practice in surgical emergencies and critical care.
   An alternative solution to ACS implementation nationally
is the regionalization of EGS care to centers of excellence
with expertise in surgical acute care. Proponents argue that
trauma care has already been successfully regionalized to
American College of Surgeons-designated trauma centers in
much of the country and that EGS care could be similarly
organized. Some early experiments with regionalization of
EGS care to trauma centers report improved mortality and
efficiency [35, 36]. Multiple authors have described superior
outcomes for EGS patients who present directly to tertiary
centers as opposed to those requiring interhospital transfer
[37, 38]. This regionalization of EGS care would require the
pre-hospital triage of EGS patients to an appropriate regional
center.


Defining Quality and Standards with EGS
There are three well-defined national programs of accredita-
tion that have seen improved surgical success and quality in
surgery. They are the National Surgical Quality Improvement
978   F. Condon and R. Lim

Program (NSQIP), the Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery
Accreditation and Quality Improvement Program
(MBSAQIP), and the Trauma Quality Improvement Project
(TQIP). The NSQIP evaluates a random 10% of a hospital’s
cases and compares their 30-day outcomes to equivalent hos-
pitals and national averages. The MBSAQIP and the TQIP
programs evaluate 100% of a hospital’s cases in those special-
ties to establish national standards and expected outcomes in
those patient populations. In the case of MBSAQIP, it has
helped to standardize the practice of bariatric surgery and
provide direction on what constitutes quality care in that
specialty [39]. The success of the TQIP goes further, in that
fewer deaths and fewer major complications in trauma
patients are seen in hospitals that participate in the TQIP
program [40].
   There are no such definitions or metrics of success for the
ACS surgeon. ACS has demonstrated a need for it as EGS
continues to have a high surgical morbidity and mortality
rate. For example, one study listed major morbidity and death
after emergent colon resection to be around 40% [41].
Additionally, an increasing number of EGS pathologies are
managed nonoperatively. A shortcoming of NSQIP is the
failure to capture the nonoperative cases. Small bowel obstruc-
tion, diverticulitis, and appendicitis are being successfully
managed nonoperatively at increasing rates [42–44]. Such
management and their results must be analyzed if an honest
comparison of EGS outcomes is to be made.
   An EGS Quality Improvement Program (EGSQIP) would
likely help define what skills a quality ACS provider would
have and what resources a quality ACS hospital would have.
In a model similar to regionalized trauma centers, institutions
that do not have the appropriate ACS resources would be
able to quickly transfer those patients to those that did. From
the success of the aforementioned programs, there is every
reason to believe that this would improve outcomes and qual-
ity in EGS surgery. Further, it is a system that under-resourced
hospitals could use to get their sicker patients to the better-­
resourced hospital and fellowship-trained specialists.
    Chapter 51. The Changing Paradigm in Acute Care…         979

Moreover, hospitals would have a mechanism for determin-
ing where their practice gaps lie and where they should seek
improvement to provide better care for EGS patients.


Conclusion
In sum, it should come as no surprise that the fellowship-­
trained ACS surgeon working in an appropriately resourced
and staffed facility is likely to see better patient outcomes in
the field of EGS. Such improved outcomes are borne out of
specialty training in the breadth and depth of surgical emer-
gencies as well as familiarity with the complex care of an
often very sick patient population in the intensive care unit.
Unfortunately, there just aren’t enough such surgeons to
serve the entire US population; and in fact, most of the coun-
try is underserved in this regard. Surgeon workforce projec-
tions suggest this disparity is likely to worsen before it
improves. Two concepts may be able to address this issue. The
first is to develop an EGSQIP to help define skills, metrics,
resources, and expected outcomes needed to provide quality
care at different hospitals. The second is to regionalize ACS
such that sicker patients who exceed the capabilities of a
smaller hospital, to include individual physician skill, would
have a mechanism for a more timely and more appropriate
transfer.


References
1. Smith M, Hussain A, Xiao J, Scheidler W, Reddy H, Olugbade
   K Jr, Campbell D Jr. The importance of improving the quality
   of emergency surgery for a regional quality collaborative. Ann
   Surg. 2013;257(4):596.
2. Stoneham M, Murray D, Foss N. Emergency surgery: the big
   three–abdominal aortic aneurysm, laparotomy and hip fracture.
   Anaesthesia. 2014;69:70–80.
980    F. Condon and R. Lim

 3. Sudarshan M, Feldman LS, Louis ES, Al-Habboubi M, Hassan
    MME, Fata P, Khwaja KA. Predictors of mortality and morbidity
    for acute care surgery patients. J Surg Res. 2015;193(2):868–73.
 4. Farhat JS, Velanovich V, Falvo AJ, Horst HM, Swartz A, Patton
    JH Jr, Rubinfeld IS. Are the frail destined to fail? Frailty index
    as predictor of surgical morbidity and mortality in the elderly. J
    Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2012;72(6):1526–31.
 5. St-Louis E, Sudarshan M, Al-Habboubi M, Hassan MEH,
    Deckelbaum DL, Razek TS, Khwaja K. The outcomes of the
    elderly in acute care general surgery. Eur J Trauma Emerg Surg.
    2016;42(1):107–13.
 6. Havens JM, Peetz AB, Do WS, Cooper Z, Kelly E, Askari R,
    Salim A. The excess morbidity and mortality of emergency gen-
    eral surgery. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2015;78(2):306–11.
 7. Mullen MG, Michaels AD, Mehaffey JH, Guidry CA, Turrentine
    FE, Hedrick TL, Friel CM. Risk associated with complications
    and mortality after urgent surgery vs elective and emergency
    surgery: implications for defining “quality” and reporting out-
    comes for urgent surgery. JAMA Surg. 2017;152(8):768–74.
 8. American Association of the Surgery for Trauma. Acute care
    surgery overview AAST. 2020, October 6. https://www.aast.org/
    acute-­care-­surgery-­overview.
 9. American Board of Medical Specialties. Specialty and subspe-
    cialty certificates ABMS. 2020, October 6. https://www.abms.org/
    member-­boards/specialty-­subspecialty-­certificates/.
10. Daniel VT, Ingraham AM, Khubchandani JA, Ayturk D, Kiefe
    CI, Santry HP. Variations in the delivery of emergency general
    surgery care in the era of acute care surgery. Jt Comm J Qual
    Patient Saf. 2019;45(1):14–23.
11. Khalil M, Pandit V, Rhee P, Kulvatunyou N, Orouji T, Tang
    A, Joseph B. Certified acute care surgery programs improve
    ­outcomes in patients undergoing emergency surgery: a nation-
     wide analysis. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2015;79(1):60–4.
12. To KB, Kamdar NS, Patil P, Collins SD, Seese E, Krapohl GL,
     et al. Acute care surgery model and outcomes in emergency
     general surgery. J Am Coll Surg. 2019;228(1):21–8.
13. Cubas RF, Gómez NR, Rodriguez S, Wanis M, Sivanandam A,
     Garberoglio CA. Outcomes in the management of appendici-
     tis and cholecystitis in the setting of a new acute care surgery
     service model: impact on timing and cost. J Am Coll Surg.
     2012;215(5):715–21.
    Chapter 51. The Changing Paradigm in Acute Care…                981

14. Chana P, Burns EM, Arora S, Darzi AW, Faiz OD. A systematic
     review of the impact of dedicated emergency surgical services on
     patient outcomes. Ann Surg. 2016;263(1):20–7.
15. Earley AS, Pryor JP, Kim PK, Hedrick JH, Kurichi JE, Minogue
     AC, Schwab CW. An acute care surgery model improves out-
     comes in patients with appendicitis. Ann Surg. 2006;244(4):498.
16. Lissauer ME, Galvagno SM Jr, Rock P, Narayan M, Shah P,
     Spencer H, Diaz JJ. Increased ICU resource needs for an
     academic emergency general surgery service. Crit Care Med.
     2014;42(4):910–7.
17. Ghorra S, Reinert SE, Cioffi W, Buczko G, Simms HH. Analysis
    of the effect of conversion from open to closed surgical intensive
    care unit. Ann Surg. 1999;229(2):163.
18. van der Sluis FJ, Slagt C, Liebman B, Beute J, Mulder JW, Engel
    AF. The impact of open versus closed format ICU admission
    practices on the outcome of high risk surgical patients: a cohort
    analysis. BMC Surg. 2011;11(1):18.
19. Klein AL, Brown CV, Aydelotte J, Ali S, Clark A, Coopwood
    B. Implementation of a surgical intensive care unit service
    is associated with improved outcomes for trauma patients. J
    Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2014;77(6):964–8.
20. Ricci KB, Rushing AP, Ingraham AM, Daniel VT, Paredes AZ,
    Diaz A, Santry HP. The association between self-declared acute
    care surgery services and operating room access: results from a
    national survey. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2019;87(4):898–906.
21. Daniel VT, Rushing AP, Ingraham AM, Ricci KB, Paredes AZ,
    Diaz A, et al. Association between operating room access and
    mortality for life-threatening general surgery emergencies. J
    Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2019;87(1):35.
22. McCunn M, Dutton RP, Dagal A, Varon AJ, Kaslow O, Kucik
    CJ, Grissom T. Trauma, critical care, and emergency care
    ­anesthesiology: a new paradigm for the “acute care” anesthesi-
     ologist? Anesth Analg. 2015;121(6):1668–73.
23. Conti B, Greco KM, McCunn M. The acute care anesthesiologist
     as resuscitationist. Int Anesthesiol Clin. 2017;55(3):109–16.
24. Cohn SM, Price MA, Villarreal CL. Trauma and surgical critical
     care workforce in the United States: a severe surgeon shortage
     appears imminent. J Am Coll Surg. 2009;209(4):446–52.
25. Williams TE Jr, Ellison EC. Population analysis predicts a future
     critical shortage of general surgeons. Surgery. 2008;144(4):548–56.
26. Khubchandani JA, Ingraham AM, Daniel VT, Ayturk D, Kiefe
     CI, Santry HP. Geographic diffusion and implementation of
982      F. Condon and R. Lim

      acute care surgery: an uneven solution to the National emer-
      gency general surgery crisis. JAMA Surg. 2018;153(2):150–9.
27.   Miller PR, Wildman EA, Chang MC, Meredith JW. Acute care
      surgery: impact on practice and economics of elective surgeons.
      J Am Coll Surg. 2012;214(4):531–5.
28.   Austin MT, Diaz JJ Jr, Feurer ID, Miller RS, May AK,
      Guillamondegui OD, et al. Creating an emergency general
      surgery service enhances the productivity of trauma surgeons,
      general surgeons and the hospital. J Trauma Acute Care Surg.
      2005;58(5):906–10.
29.   Barnes SL, Cooper CJ, Coughenour JP, MacIntyre AD, Kessel
      JW. Impact of acute care surgery to departmental productivity. J
      Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2011;71(4):1027–34.
30.   Pakula A, Skinner R. Do acute care surgeons need bariat-
      ric surgical training to ensure optimal outcomes in obese
      patients with nonbariatric emergencies? Surg Obes Relat Dis.
      2018;14(3):339–41.
31.   Boyd-Carson H, Doleman B, Herrod PJJ, Anderson ID, Williams
      JP, Lund JN, et al. Association between surgeon special inter-
      est and mortality after emergency laparotomy. Br J Surg.
      2019;106(7):940–8.
32.   Moore LJ, Turner KL, Jones SL, Fahy BN, Moore FA. Availability
      of acute care surgeons improves outcomes in patients requiring
      emergent colon surgery. Am J Surg. 2011;202(6):837–42.
33.   Schuster KM, McGillicuddy EA, Maung AA, Kaplan LJ, Davis
      KA. Can acute care surgeons perform emergency colorectal
      procedures with good outcomes? J Trauma Acute Care Surg.
      2011;71(1):94–101.
34.   Ball CG, Hameed SM, Brenneman FD. Acute care surgery: a
      new strategy for the general surgery patients left behind. Can J
      Surg. 2010;53(2):84.
35.   Diaz JJ Jr, Norris PR, Gunter OL, Collier BR, Riordan WP,
      Morris JA Jr. Does regionalization of acute care surgery decrease
      mortality? J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2011;71(2):442–6.
36.   Block EF, Rudloff B, Noon C, Behn B. Regionalization of surgi-
      cal services in central Florida: the next step in acute care surgery.
      J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2010;69(3):640–4.
37.   Yelverton S, Rozario N, Matthews BD, Reinke CE. Interhospital
      transfer for emergency general surgery: an independent predic-
      tor of mortality. Am J Surg. 2018;216(4):787–92.
38.   Santry HP, Janjua S, Chang Y, Petrovick L, Velmahos
      GC. Interhospital transfers of acute care surgery patients: should
      Chapter 51. The Changing Paradigm in Acute Care…          983

      care for nontraumatic surgical emergencies be regionalized?
      World J Surg. 2011;35(12):2660–7.
39.   Dawson TH, Bhutiani N, Benns MV, Miller KR, Bozeman
      MC, Kehdy FJ, Motameni AT. Comparing patterns of care and
      outcomes after operative management of complications after
      bariatric surgery at MBSAQIP accredited bariatric centers and
      non-bariatric facilities. Surg Endosc. 2020:1–6.
40.   Hemmila MR, Cain-Nielsen AH, Jakubus JL, Mikhail JN,
      Dimick JB. Association of hospital participation in a regional
      trauma quality improvement collaborative with patient out-
      comes. JAMA Surg. 2018;153(8):747–56.
41.   Ingraham AM, Cohen ME, Bilimoria KY, Raval MV, Ko CY,
      Nathens AB, Hall BL. Comparison of 30-day outcomes after
      emergency general surgery procedures: potential for targeted
      improvement. Surgery. 2010;148(2):217–38.
42.   Matsushima K, Sabour A, Park C, Strumwasser A, Inaba K,
      Demetriades D. Management of adhesive small bowel obstruc-
      tion: a distinct paradigm shift in the United States. J Trauma
      Acute Care Surg. 2019;86(3):383–91.
43.   Collaborative, C. O. D. A., Flum DR, Davidson GH, Monsell
      SE, Shapiro NI, Odom SR, et al. A randomized trial comparing
      antibiotics with appendectomy for appendicitis. N Engl J Med.
      2020;383:1907–19.
44.   Salem L, Anaya DA, Flum DR. Temporal changes in the man-
      agement of diverticulitis. J Surg Res. 2005;124(2):318–23.
Chapter 52
Super-subspecialization
of General Surgery: Is
This Better for Patients?
Joseph A. Sujka and Christopher G. DuCoin




Objectives
1. Define the population impacts of care access in a special-
   ized model.
2. Who owns the patient in a paradigm of specialists?
3. What is lost in super-specialization?
   Specialization has been becoming more common in the
world of general surgery. At the time of writing, the American
Board of Medical Specialties has over 24 separate medical
and surgical specialty boards. In a survey of US allopathic
surgery residency graduates from 2009 to 2013, over 77%
pursued a specialty [1], despite findings that long-term finan-
cial outcomes may not be improved [2]. Some suggest that
this trend is motivated somewhat by mentorship and overall
confidence when completing residency [1]. The trend toward
specialization began around the World War II with the estab-


J. A. Sujka · C. G. DuCoin (*)
Department of Surgery, University of South Florida Morsani
College of Medicine, Tampa, FL, USA
e-mail: josephsujka@usf.edu; cduoin@usf.edu

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature   985
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_52
986   J. A. Sujka and C. G. DuCoin

lishment of the British Association of Aesthetic Plastic
Surgeons and has continued to change the world of general
surgery since [3]. Many have written as detractors of this
model and question whether or not subspecialization is truly
better for the patient [4–6]. In this chapter, this question will
be examined.
   Clarification of the terms subspecialization and super-­
specialization is necessary: Subspecialization is when a sur-
geon is carrying out the broad practice of their specialty but
develops an expertise in one area. Super-specialization is
when a surgeon discontinues the broad practice of their spe-
cialty to concentrate on one particular area of surgery [7].


 opulation Impacts of Care Access
P
in a Specialized Model
Healthcare disparities and access to care are important ele-
ments of social justice that must be considered in all aspects
of healthcare delivery including access to specialists.
Unfortunately, lower income, insurance status, race, and eth-
nicity have all been associated with limited surgical care
access. Black and Hispanic patients have significantly higher
rates of postoperative complications, blood transfusions, peri-
operative mortality, and longer hospital stays. On top of that,
patients of color are less likely to receive a variety of onco-
logic and vascular procedures and are more likely to undergo
open operations compared to white patients [8–10]. Access to
procedures by specialists has been suggested to improve out-
comes. One study examined access to colonoscopy from
medical specialists and found colonoscopy was less likely to
be performed by a specialist if the patient was non-white [11].
Due to these disparities, ongoing increases in surgical special-
ization may be indirectly worsening these inequities.
Therefore, it is important that current disparities in patient
care be examined and evaluated for ongoing areas of
improvement.
        Chapter 52. Super-subspecialization of General…     987

   Another important question alongside equitable access to
care is this: Does subspecialization improve the quality of
patient care and outcomes? At this time, there is no definitive
answer to this question; however, it appears that specializa-
tion may improve patient care and outcomes. One study
compared breast cancer outcome among patients in a cancer
registry both before and after involving surgeons with surgi-
cal specialization. They found a significant improvement in
disease-free survival and recurrence rates; however, the
authors admit this may be due to an increase in the use of
appropriate systemic therapy. It could be argued though that
the increased education of a specialist leads to patients get-
ting appropriate systemic therapy. There is also the possibility
that this change was due to improvements in overall patient
care and was independent of surgical specialization [12].
   Colorectal surgery has also examined their outcomes in
comparison to general surgery. One study examined 974
patients and found an overall higher 5-year survival in a
group treated in a colorectal unit. Being treated in the spe-
cialized colorectal unit was found on survival regression
analysis to be an independent predictor of survival. However,
patients in the colorectal unit were also overall lower stage
cancers, and the general surgery unit was heterogenous with
ten total surgeons to the colorectal unit’s one surgeon [13].
Another study retrospectively reviewed 196 consecutive
patients who underwent emergent left-sided colonic resec-
tion. They compared outcomes of acute care and colorectal
surgeons. Colorectal surgeons were found to have similar
morbidity and mortality but lower overall stoma rates (40.4
versus 88.8%) and higher rates of primary anastomosis (85.5
versus 28.7%) both of which were statistically significant [14].
The authors do not go as far as to say that acute care surgeons
should not perform these operations but suggest that acute
care surgeons should receive sufficient experience to perform
the technically more complex operation of a primary
anastomosis.
   It appears this improvement in patient outcomes may
extend into the world of emergency surgery was well. A ret-
988   J. A. Sujka and C. G. DuCoin

rospective study examined 30-day operative mortality after
emergency laparotomy and found lower mortality rates in
patients who underwent emergency laparotomy by specialists
with interest in the affected area of the GI tract (UGI or
colorectal) [15].
   Finally, a systematic review was performed focusing on
surgeon volume and specialization in relation to patient out-
comes. The 22 studies included contained 144,421 patients.
Specialist surgeons had significantly better outcomes in 20 of
the 22 studies in comparison to general surgeons. They also
had lower mortality (11 of 12 studies), fewer complications
(14 of 17 studies), and shorter hospital stays (5 of 5 studies).
When examining specialization the majority of prospective
and retrospective studies showed a beneficial effect for
patients [16].
   Based on the literature, it appears that a specialized
patient care model may produce superior results, but in many
studies the role of multidisciplinary conferences to discuss
patients and specialized clinics is not evaluated as potential
confounders.


 ho Owns the Patient in a Paradigm
W
of Specialists?
As the field of surgery becomes progressively more special-
ized, it can be frustrating and confusing to the patient on who
is driving their care. Eugene Stead is quoted as saying, “what
this patient needs is a doctor” [17]. This quote is particularly
impactful now as one patient can have multiple treating phy-
sicians and not know whom to turn to for answers.
   Some have opined that this fracturing of patient care and
changes to resident training have led to a decrease in patient
ownership, not only by residents but also by specialists caring
for patients [18, 19]. Even the phrase “patient ownership” has
been examined to see if its meaning has changed or requires
        Chapter 52. Super-subspecialization of General…      989

redefining in this modern era of medicine [20, 21]. In many
cases the admitting surgical or medical team takes the lead on
overarching patient care issues, although the boundaries for
whether consulting specialists may or may not adjust patient
care is not standardized.
   Sparse objective data exists on how much of a problem
changes in patient ownership and care models may present;
however, the cost of healthcare has been increasing along
with the rise in specialists. This rise in cost has been implied
by some to be indicative of an underlying problem with the
specialist model [22]. In the simplest terms, having multiple
specialists complicates planning of patient care, appears to
increase cost, and separates a patient into multiple small parts
based on their respective teams of care.


What Is Lost in Super-specialization?
Super-specialization, or when a surgeon discontinues the
broad practice of their specialty to concentrate on one par-
ticular area of surgery, is a relatively new issue in the world of
surgery. Minimal papers or opinion pieces have been written
to discuss the potential pitfalls of this practice. Access to gen-
eral surgeons remains a concern as the United States is pro-
jected to have a shortfall of general surgeons with some
predicting a shortage of over 6,000 general surgeons by 2050
[23]. Even with ongoing specialization and changes seen in
the field of surgery, a recent study found that general surgery
still remains a heterogenous field with a strong need for a
broad-based surgical education [24]. To extend this to super-­
specialization if the world of surgery was to be even further
subdivided, this deficiency of general surgery and specializa-
tions would be further exacerbated potentially leading to
difficulty finding care for patients outside of tertiary aca-
demic centers. Only time will tell if this practice becomes
more widespread and what affect it may have on patient’s
care.
990   J. A. Sujka and C. G. DuCoin

Where Do We Go from Here?
Specialization has become more common in the world of
surgery for a variety of reasons. This has been in the back-
ground of disparities in medical care, which may be worsened
by specialization. However, care from specialists does appear
to improve patient outcomes if not patient ownership. We
must be cautious that at-risk populations do not suffer from
this increase in specialization and work diligently to improve
their access to care. Specialization will not be eliminated as
the knowledge and complexity of medicine increases, but it is
our duty to make sure all patients receive the benefits of this
increasing education.


Bibliography
1. Klingensmith ME, Cogbill TH, Luchette F, Biester T, Samonte
   K, Jones A, et al. Factors influencing the decision of surgery
   residency graduates to pursue general surgery practice versus
   fellowship. Ann Surg. 2015;262(3):449–55; discussion 454-455.
2. Baimas-George M, Fleischer B, Slakey D, Kandil E, Korndorffer
   JR, DuCoin C. Is it All About the Money? Not All Surgical
   Subspecialization Leads to Higher Lifetime Revenue when
   Compared to General Surgery. J Surg Educ. 2017;74(6):e62–6.
3. Burd DA. Super-specialization leads to higher surgical stan-
   dards? Br J Plast Surg. 1990;43(1):112–5.
4. Silen W. Super-specialization fellowships in gastrointestinal sur-
   gery: an unrealistic dream. Surgery. 1992;111(4):479–80.
5. Black J. Has surgical subspecialization gone too far? Hosp Med
   Lond Engl. 1998. 1999;60(3):206–9.
6. Rajan P, Din NA. Sub-specialization in general surgery--the
   end of the “general” surgeon? Hosp Med Lond Engl 1998.
   2005;66(3):185.
7. Milward TM. Sub-specialization or super-specialization. Br J
   Plast Surg. 1991;44(7):554.
8. Haider AH, Scott VK, Rehman KA, Velopulos C, Bentley JM,
   Cornwell EE, et al. Racial disparities in surgical care and out-
   comes in the United States: a comprehensive review of patient,
           Chapter 52. Super-subspecialization of General…           991

      provider, and systemic factors. J Am Coll Surg. 2013;216(3):482–
      92.e12.
 9.   Kressin NR, Groeneveld PW. Race/Ethnicity and overuse of
      care: a systematic review. Milbank Q. 2015;93(1):112–38.
10.   Ravi P, Sood A, Schmid M, Abdollah F, Sammon JD, Sun M,
      et al. Racial/Ethnic Disparities in Perioperative Outcomes of
      Major Procedures: Results From the National Surgical Quality
      Improvement Program. Ann Surg. 2015;262(6):955–64.
11.   Josey MJ, Odahowski CL, Zahnd WE, Schootman M, Eberth
      JM. Disparities in Utilization of Medical Specialists for
      Colonoscopy. Health Equity. 2019;3(1):464–71.
12.   Golledge J, Wiggins JE, Callam MJ. Effect of surgical subspecial-
      ization on breast cancer outcome. Br J Surg. 2000;87(10):1420–5.
13.   Platell C, Lim D, Tajudeen N, Tan J-L, Wong K. Dose surgical
      sub-specialization influence survival in patients with colorectal
      cancer? World J Gastroenterol. 2003;9(5):961–4.
14.   Gibbons G, Tan CJ, Bartolo DCC, Filgate R, Makin G, Barwood
      N, et al. Emergency left colonic resections on an acute surgical
      unit: does subspecialization improve outcomes? ANZ J Surg.
      2015;85(10):739–43.
15.   Brown LR, McLean RC, Perren D, O’Loughlin P, McCallum
      IJ. Evaluating the effects of surgical subspecialisation on patient
      outcomes following emergency laparotomy: A retrospective
      cohort study. Int J Surg Lond Engl. 2019;62:67–73.
16.   Chowdhury MM, Dagash H, Pierro A. A systematic review of
      the impact of volume of surgery and specialization on patient
      outcome. Br J Surg. 2007;94(2):145–61.
17.   Stead EA, Wagner GS, Cebe B, Rozear MP, Stead EA Jr. What
      this patient needs is a doctor. Durham, N.C: Carolina Academic
      Press; 1978. p. 244.
18.   Conti CR. Some thoughts about patient ownership. Clin Cardiol.
      2015;38(1):1.
19.   Masters P. In our health system, who “owns” patients [Internet].
      KevinMD. Available from: https://www.kevinmd.com/
      blog/2019/06/in-­our-­health-­system-­who-­owns-­patients.html
20.   Kiger ME, Meyer HS, Hammond C, Miller KM, Dickey KJ,
      Hammond DV, et al. Whose patient is this? a scoping review of
      patient ownership. Acad Med J Assoc Am Med Coll. 2019;94(11S
      Association of American Medical Colleges Learn Serve Lead:
      Proceedings of the 58th Annual Research in Medical Education
      Sessions):S95–104.
992    J. A. Sujka and C. G. DuCoin

21. Cowley DS, Markman JD, Best JA, Greenberg EL, Grodesky
    MJ, Murray SB, et al. Understanding ownership of patient care:
    A dual-site qualitative study of faculty and residents from medi-
    cine and psychiatry. Perspect Med Educ. 2017;6(6):405–12.
22. Jauhar S. https://doi.org/10.1002/clc.22348 [Internet]. Time.
    2014. Available from: https://time.com/3138561/specialist-­
    doctors-­high-­cost/.
23. Williams TE, Ellison EC. Population analysis predicts a future
    critical shortage of general surgeons. Surgery. 2008;144(4):548–
    54. discussion 554-556
24. Decker MR, Dodgion CM, Kwok AC, Hu Y-Y, Havlena JA, Jiang
    W, et al. Specialization and the current practices of general sur-
    geons. J Am Coll Surg. 2014;218(1):8–15.
Chapter 53
What Is the Connection
Between Physician
Relationships with Industry
and Patient Care?
Caroline E. Reinke, Peter M. Denk, Erin Schwarz,
and Phillip P. Shadduck




All financial relationships between physicians and commercial interests
should be disclosed. When financial relationships exist, the potential for
bias can be mitigated by evaluating the relevance of the financial relation-
ship to the educational/scientific content and peer reviewing the content
for balance.


C. E. Reinke (*)
Department of Surgery, Atrium Health, Charlotte, NC, USA
e-mail: Caroline.e.reinke@atriumhealth.org
P. M. Denk
GI Surgical Specialists, Fort Myers, FL, USA
e-mail: pmdenk@gisurgical.com
E. Schwarz
SAGES, Los Angeles, CA, USA
e-mail: erin@sages.org
P. P. Shadduck
Duke University, Durham, NC, USA

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature             993
Switzerland AG 2022
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4_53
994   C. E. Reinke et al.

Introduction
In society, government, and medicine, a tension exists between
those who emphasize that physician relationships with health-
care companies have the potential to negatively impact
patient care and those who emphasize that these relation-
ships are necessary and beneficial to medical device and drug
development. Both points of view are true. In rare instances,
there have been examples of relationships between compa-
nies and physicians (or physician organizations) that have
impacted educational programs and clinical initiatives in
ways that were not in the best interest of the patient [1].
There have been reports of high-profile cases of financial
kickbacks received by physicians in exchange for promoting
various commercial products [2]. Such cases of professional
misconduct undermine public trust. At the same time, rela-
tionships between physicians and industry are critical for the
development of devices and procedures that improve clinical
outcomes. Practicing physicians best understand the unmet
clinical needs that should be addressed by new technologies.
When engineers translate ideas and unmet needs into proto-
types, direct feedback from physicians, to modify and advance
medical devices and related procedures, is important to
ensure the introduction of safe, effective, and cost-effective
technologies and techniques [3–5]. Collaborations between
stakeholders are also essential to ensure the safe adoption
and implementation of novel techniques and instruments
through education and large-scale hands-on training [3]. In
this chapter, we will explore financial relationships with
industry and potential conflicts of interest in medical educa-
tion, conflicts that might directly or indirectly impact patient
care, and we will detail the SAGES model for disclosing and
managing relevant financial relationships.
   For purposes of this chapter, we will utilize terms as
defined by the Accreditation Council for Continuing Medical
Education (ACCME). The ACCME is the organization that
regulates accredited education (CME) to ensure that it is free
of bias. In December 2020, the ACCME released its new
         Chapter 53.   What Is the Connection Between…      995

guidance document, termed Standards for Integrity and
Independence (SII), which replaced its 2004 Standards for
Commercial Support (SCS) [6, 7]. With the 2020 update came
some new terminology and revised definitions. The terms
“commercial interest,” “industry,” and “conflict of interest”
were replaced by “ineligible company” and “relevant finan-
cial relationships.” In the new SII, the ACCME defines an
ineligible company as one “whose primary business is pro-
ducing, marketing, selling, re-selling, or distributing health-
care products used by or on patients.” The companies are
called “ineligible” because they are not eligible to be accred-
ited in the ACCME system. The ACCME SII requires that all
the planning and implementation of accredited educational
content must occur independently from any ACCME-defined
ineligible companies. The ACCME states that “the accredited
provider [of CME] is responsible for identifying relevant
financial relationships between individuals in control of edu-
cational content and ineligible companies and managing
these to ensure they do not introduce commercial bias into
the education. Financial relationships of any dollar amount
are defined as relevant if the educational content is related to
the business lines or products of the ineligible company.”
    It is also worth noting that the terms “owner” and
“employee” have been redefined in the December 2020 stan-
dards. “Owners are defined as individuals who have an own-
ership interest in a company, except for stockholders of
publicly traded companies, or holders of shares through a
pension or mutual fund. Employees are defined as individuals
hired to work for another person or business (the employer)
for compensation and who are subject to the employer’s
direction as to the details of how to perform the job” [6].
    Relevant financial relationships, if not recognized and
managed well, have the potential to bias not only CME but
also the education of medical students and graduate trainees,
drafting and promotion of clinical practice guidelines, fund-
ing of research, clinical study design and data analysis, scien-
tific publication, and health system administration. Though
financial relationships that influence patient safety and qual-
996   C. E. Reinke et al.

ity care can exist in many forms beyond the scope of CME,
the ACCME provides the most broadly accepted and rigor-
ous definitions around financial relationships. As a
Professional Medical Association (PMA) steeped in surgical
innovation, SAGES is an international leader in patient
safety, quality, and outcomes through physician education.
The ACCME standards have been the foundation for the
SAGES work in this area.


 xamples of Ways that Financial
E
Relationships Can Impact Quality, Outcomes,
and Patient Safety
In the late 1990s, there was a significant publicity surrounding
more than 3000 lawsuits filed over cervical pedicle screws
utilized in surgical operations for treatment of degenerative
disc disease. In over 400 of these lawsuits, the litigants alleged
that numerous specialty societies and several university cen-
ters had promoted, in medical education activities, the off-­
label use of the pedicle screw due to financial relationships
between the organizations and the manufacturer. All of the
lawsuits were eventually dismissed for lack of evidence [7].
The concerns raised by the patients in these cases, as well as
many other pressures, contributed to the 2003 guidance
issued by the Office of the Inspector General (OIG) of the
US Department of Health and Human Services regarding
commercial support of medical education activities. The OIG
identifies educational grants as something that may place a
company at high risk for violating FDA regulations and/or
federal anti-kickback regulations [8]. It was in this environ-
ment, in 2004, that the ACCME dramatically revised the 1992
Standards for Commercial Support to clarify what was and
was not allowable in CME programming [9].
   There are, unfortunately, more recent examples of unrec-
ognized/unmanaged relevant financial relationships that
adversely impacted patient care. One recent example from
academic medicine involved a prominent medical oncologist
          Chapter 53.   What Is the Connection Between…       997

and chief medical officer at a world-renowned cancer center
who “failed to disclose millions of dollars in payments from
drug and health care companies in recent years, omitting his
financial ties from dozens of research articles in prestigious
publications like The New England Journal of Medicine and
the Lancet.” Also, “he put a positive spin on the results of two
Roche-sponsored clinical trials that many others considered
disappointments, without disclosing his relationship to the
company. Since 2014, he has received more than $3 million
from Roche…” It’s difficult to know how widespread the
negative impact on patient care was from this physician’s
biased research publications, academic presentations, society
leadership influence, and medical center influence [10].
   Research has demonstrated that there is a connection
between payments received from commercial interests and
both physician prescribing habits and research conclusions.
ProPublica reported in 2016 that “the more money doctors
receive from drug and medical device companies, the more
brand-name drugs they tend to prescribe” [11]. Studies have
also revealed that some authors with relevant financial rela-
tionships publish results that are more favorable toward
industry [12, 13]. It is evident that improperly disclosed and
managed relevant financial relationships with industry may
impact quality, outcomes, and patient safety.
   Unfortunately, a physician disclosure-alone approach,
which had been allowed by the ACCME prior to 2004, has
not proven to be effective at preventing bias [14, 15]. The 2004
ACCME Standards included the requirement that accredited
CME providers must both identify and manage conflicts of
interest in advance of educational activities. Voluntary physi-
cian disclosure of their financial relationships to the audience
is a necessary but insufficient management mechanism. The
2020 ACCME SII requires that accredited education provid-
ers must (a) collect information from all individuals about
their financial relationships, (b) exclude owners or employees
of ineligible companies, (c) identify relevant financial rela-
tionships, (d) mitigate relevant financial relationships, and (e)
disclose all relevant financial relationships to the learners [6].
998   C. E. Reinke et al.

 AGES Processes for Disclosure
S
and Management of Relevant Financial
Relationships
Recognizing the importance of internal oversight of potential
and real conflicts of interest within its innovative member-
ship, SAGES began developing conflict of interest (COI)
review processes over a decade ago. In 2009, the SAGES
Executive Committee established both an Industry Relations
Task Force (IRTF) to study corporate-level financial relation-
ships and a Conflict of Interest Task Force (CITF) to study
physician-level financial relationships. These task forces were
led by seasoned SAGES leaders, and they were charged with
developing and implementing processes that accomplish two
goals: (1) eliminate influence that financial relationships with
industry might have upon educational content and (2) sustain
innovation, research, education, and other worthy activities,
including those performed collaboratively with pharmaceuti-
cal/device companies. The task forces produced several poli-
cies, procedures, and work products, including the SAGES
2010 Statement [16].


 AGES Statement on the Relationship Between
S
Professional Medical Associations and Industry
In February 2010, the SAGES IRTF and Board published a
“Statement on the Relationship between Professional
Medical Associations and Industry” [16]. The statement
affirms important differences between drug and device devel-
opment. Early drug development is generally conducted by
basic scientists, including chemists, immunologists, pharma-
cists, and others. Medical clinicians become more involved at
the clinical trial stage of drug development. In contrast, sur-
geons are typically required throughout the development
process for surgical devices including identifying unmet
needs, defining device requirements, developing and testing
         Chapter 53.   What Is the Connection Between…      999

device prototypes, performing preclinical research, and con-
ducting clinical trials. Once new technologies and techniques
are approved, surgeons are also necessary to guide their safe
introduction into practice [16–18]. Surgeons and other spe-
cialists who perform invasive procedures (such as gastroen-
terologists, cardiologists, and interventional radiologists)
require hands-on training for safe implementation of new
technology. If regulatory changes regarding industry relation-
ships exclude surgical innovators from safe device develop-
ment and introduction, then negative clinical and economic
repercussions would follow. Recognizing this, SAGES opined
that with effective COI disclosure and management pro-
cesses, Professional Medical Associations (PMAs) should be
capable of providing educational activities that are scientifi-
cally and ethically sound, without eliminating all financial
support from industry. Of course, with this position comes
significant responsibility. The SAGES leadership understands
and embraces that responsibility, and stringent internal poli-
cies and processes for the organization, leadership, and all
educational activities have been developed accordingly.


Disclosure and Mitigation Process

SAGES endorses and complies with the newly released
ACCME SII which requires that individuals who control
CME content disclose all relevant financial relationships with
ACCME-ineligible companies. The ACCME requires the
accredited provider to identify and mitigate relevant financial
relationships in advance of the activity. According to the
ACCME, “financial relationships of any dollar amount are
defined as relevant if the educational content is related to the
business lines or products of the ineligible company” [19].
   SAGES developed a comprehensive process for identify-
ing and mitigating relevant financial relationships in 2009,
prior to the CMSS Code, the Physician Payment Sunshine
Act, and other developments. The SAGES process was
refined over several years and published in 2014 [20, 21]. The
1000 C. E. Reinke et al.

process was also evaluated annually for its effectiveness dur-
ing its first 3 years of implementation [21]. Notably stringent
features of the SAGES disclosure and mitigation process
include the following: (1) Reviews of disclosures are per-
formed independently by at least three people—a CME staff
member, one or more physicians (COI committee members
and session chairs), and a final review by the COI committee
chair, co-chairs, and staff; (2) for scientific abstract/video sub-
missions, all authors (not just the presenting author) must
disclose their financial relationships; (3) faculty who have
SAGES-defined level 3 conflicts (relevant consulting rela-
tionships, Fig. 53.1) are required to submit their presentation
for peer review prior to the presentation, with firm deadlines;


 Level of Potential Conflict              Action by SAGES                        Resulting Actions
 Level 1: Nothing to disclose             Chairs to review for accuracy          Print disclosures in program

 Level 2: Relationships with ineligible   Chairs to review for accuracy,         Print disclosures in program
 companies not relevant to content of     confirm not relevant; secondary
 session and/or lecture.                  review by Conflict of Interest
 Example: Dr. X receives honorarium       Committee (COIC)
 for consulting work for Company A.       Example: Dr. X’s relationship is not
 Company A manufactures hernia            relevant.
 repair products. Dr. X is invited to
 speak on surgical management of
 acid reflux.


 Level 3: Relationships with ineligible   Chairs to review relevance,            Letter to faculty informing them
 companies making products related        confirm that faculty is best person    of Commercial Support Policy,
 to content.                              to give lecture & adjust lecture       options for conflict management;
 Example: Dr. Y receives honorarium       subject if appropriate; secondary      Mitigation technique applied and
 for consulting work for Company A.       review by COIC; Determination of       documented in advance of activity;
 Company A manufactures hernia            management technique (typically        Print disclosures in program and
 repair products. Dr. Y is invited        peer review)                           include statement that “all relevant
 to give a talk on complications          Example: Dr. Y’s presentation will     relationships were mitigated”
 following hernia repair                  be peer reviewed in advance of the
                                          meeting; all clinical care recommen
                                          dations will be referenced; balance
                                          & impartiality will be obvious.



 Level 4: Employees and owners of a       Chairs and COIC to confirm             Only in rare cases will individual
 commercial interest making products      employment/ownership relevant;         be allowed to participate*; SAGES
 related to content.                      remove individual from                 to take control of content via
 Example 1: Dr. R is employed             position if relevant.                  peer review & closely monitored
 by Company A. Company A                  Example 1: Dr. R is removed from       presentation
 manufactures hernia repair products.     teaching position or control of
 Dr. R is invited to give a talk on       content.                               Print disclosures in program
 complications following hernia repair.   Example 2: Dr. S’s presentation
 Example 2: Dr. S is employed             will be peer reviewed in advance
 by Company A. Company A                  of the meeting; SAGES takes full
 manufactures hernia repair products.     responsibility for the content.
 Dr. S is invited to give a talk on
 earthquake preparedness in the OR.



Figure 53.1 SAGES conflict management process
         Chapter 53.   What Is the Connection Between… 1001

(4) faculty submitting their presentation after an initial dead-
line (10–21 days before the meeting) lose any PMA reim-
bursements or discounts being offered; (5) faculty submitting
their presentation after a final deadline (3–5 days before the
meeting) are removed from the program; and (6) the process
is applied uniformly, regardless of speaker rank or role.
    Less than five abstract submitters to each annual meeting
are identified with a level 4 conflict (relevant ownership/
employment relationship, Fig. 53.1), and they are not allowed
to present. About 80–100 presentations (of the 500 or so pre-
sentations at each annual meeting) must be submitted to the
COI committee for review, nearly all of the presentations
requested by the COI committee are submitted before the
posted deadlines, and about 10–15 presentations require
modification before they can be delivered at the annual
meeting. If any concerns remain (which is rare), then COI
committee representatives attend the presentations. After
each annual meeting, all attendee evaluations are reviewed
by the COI committee, program committee, and executive
committee. Any reports of perceived bias are evaluated per
our policy established for this purpose (the SAGES COI
Committee Procedures for Confidentially Evaluating Reports
of Concerns).
    The SAGES process is designed to be stringent, yet it does
rely on physician self-disclosure. By intent, we have strict
oversight of presentations. It was developed not only to meet
regulatory requirements but primarily to accomplish the goal
established by the SAGES Board in 2009: to provide educa-
tional activities that are both scientifically and ethically
sound, without being required to achieve zero financial sup-
port from industry.
    The SAGES experience with our mitigation process has
demonstrated effectiveness at meeting the goals of transpar-
ent disclosure of COI when evaluated based on audience-­
perceived bias at our annual scientific meetings. In the first
3 years after its implementation, perceived bias as reported in
attendee evaluations (1.2–2.2%) was one third of what it was
in the 3 years prior to its implementation (4.4–6.2%). During
1002   C. E. Reinke et al.

this period, 14–42% of speakers at the annual meeting had
financial relationships with industry [20]. Subsequent annual
meetings have had similar low reports of perceived bias.
Furthermore, post-meeting evaluations by the COI commit-
tee have revealed that most reports of perceived bias turn out
not to be actual bias. Actual bias at the SAGES annual meet-
ings appears to occur in less than 1% of presentations.


Conclusion
SAGES leadership carries on a decade-long tradition of
embracing the importance of rigorous evaluation of financial
relationships in education as a way to safeguard the safety
and quality of patient care provided by SAGES members.
The SAGES COI and executive committee leaders commu-
nicate regularly with the ACCME to continue refining defini-
tions and policies, as the understanding of PMA and industry
relationships evolves with time and technology advances.


References
1. Rothman DJ, McDonald WJ, Berkowitz CD, Chimonas SC,
   DeAngelis CD, Hale RW, et al. Professional medical associations
   and their relationships with industry: a proposal for controlling
   conflict of interest. JAMA. 2009;301(13):1367–72.
2. Advanced Medical Technology Association. Code of ethics 2020.
   Available from: https://www.advamed.org/issues/code-­ethics/
   code-­ethics.
3. Cervero RM, Gaines JK. Is there a relationship between com-
   mercial support and bias in continuing medical education activi-
   ties? An updated literature review. Available from: https://www.
   accme.org/publications/there-­relationship-­between-­commercial-­
   support-­and-­bias-­continuing-­medical-­education.
4. Ellison JA, Hennekens CH, Wang J, Lundberg GD, Sulkes
   D. Low rates of reporting commercial bias by physicians follow-
   ing online continuing medical education activities. Am J Med.
   2009;122(9):875–8.
           Chapter 53.    What Is the Connection Between…           1003

 5. Kawczak S, Carey W, Lopez R, Jackman D. The effect of industry
    support on participants' perceptions of bias in continuing medi-
    cal education. Acad Med. 2010;85(1):80–4.
 6. Accreditation Council for Continuing Medical Education.
    Standards for integrity and independence in accredited continu-
    ing education standalone package. Available from: https://accme.
    org/publications/standards-­f or-­i ntegrity-­a nd-­i ndependence-­
    accredited-­continuing-­education-­standalone.
 7. Eisner W. Exorcising the “Ghost of Pedicle Screw Past”.
    Orthopedics this week [Internet]. 2012 December 3, 2021.
    Available from: https://ryortho.com/2012/10/exorcising-­the-­
    ldquoghost-­o f-­p edicle-­s crew-­p astrdquo/#:~:text=Over%20
    3%2C%20000%20lawsuits%20were,and%20SRS%20were%20
    also%20sued.
 8. Conflicts of Interest in Medical Education. In: Lo B, Field MJ,
    editors. Conflict of interest in medical research, education, and
    practice. Washington DC: National Academies Press; 2009.
 9. Accreditation         Council      for      Continuing       Medical
    Education. ACCME standards for commercial sup-
    port. Available from: https://www.accme.org/publications/
    accme-­standards-­for-­commercial-­support.
10. Ornstein C, Thomas K. Top cancer researcher fails
    to disclose corporate financial ties in major research
    journals. Sloan Kettering’s Crisis [Internet]. 2018.
    ­
    Available        from:       https://www.propublica.org/article/
    doctor-­jose-­baselga-­cancer-­researcher-­corporate-­financial-­ties.
11. Ornstein C, Tigas M, Grochowski R. Now there’s proof: docs
    who get company cash tend to prescribe more brand-name meds.
    Dollars for Doctors [Internet]. 2016. Available from: https://
    www.propublica.org/article/doctors-­who-­take-­company-­cash-­
    tend-­to-­prescribe-­more-­brand-­name-­drugs.
12. Cherla DV, Olavarria OA, Bernardi K, Viso CP, Moses ML,
    Holihan JL, et al. Investigation of financial conflict of inter-
    est among published ventral hernia research. J Am Coll Surg.
    2018;226(3):230–4.
13. Turner EH, Matthews AM, Linardatos E, Tell RA, Rosenthal
    R. Selective publication of antidepressant trials and its influence
    on apparent efficacy. N Engl J Med. 2008;358(3):252–60.
14. Cain DM, Loewenstein G, Moore DA. When sunlight fails to dis-
    infect: understanding the perverse effects of disclosing conflicts
    of interest. J Consum Res. 2011;37(5):836–57.
1004   C. E. Reinke et al.

15. Loewenstein G, Sah S, Cain DM. The unintended consequences
    of conflict of interest disclosure. JAMA. 2012;307(7):669–70.
16. Society of American Gastrointestinal and Endoscopic
    Surgeons(SAGES)statement on the relationship between
    professional medical associations and industry. Surg Endosc.
    2010;24(4):742–4.
17. Stain SC, Pryor AD, Shadduck PP. The SAGES manual ethics of
    surgical innovation. Springer; 2016.
18. Strong VE, Forde KA, MacFadyen BV, Mellinger JD, Crookes
    PF, Sillin LF, et al. Ethical considerations regarding the imple-
    mentation of new technologies and techniques in surgery. Surg
    Endosc. 2014;28(8):2272–6.
19. Accreditation Council for Continuing Medical Education.
    Standard 3: identify, mitigate, and disclose relevant financial rela-
    tionships. Available from: https://www.accme.org/accreditation-­
    rules/standards-­f or-­i ntegrity-­i ndependence-­a ccredited-­c e/
    standard-­3-­identify-­mitigate-­and-­disclose-­relevant-­financial-­
    relationships.
20. Stain SC, Schwarz E, Shadduck PP, Shah PC, Ross SB, Hori Y,
    et al. A comprehensive process for disclosing and managing con-
    flicts of interest on perceived bias at the SAGES annual meeting.
    Surg Endosc. 2015;29(6):1334–40.
21. Stain SC, Schwarz E, Shadduck PP, Shah PC, Ross SB, Hori Y,
    et al. A comprehensive process for identifying and managing
    conflicts of interest reduced perceived bias at a specialty soci-
    ety annual meeting. J Contin Educ Health Prof. 2015;35 Suppl
    1:S33–5.
Index




A                                  ACS Bariatric Surgery Center
Abdominal core health quality                Network (ASC BSCN),
          collaborative                      111
          (ACHQC), 98              Action, 543
Abdominal wall reconstruction      Acute care surgery, 972, 973, 976
          (AWR), 72–73               finite resources, 977
Absenteeism, 779                     non-operative contributors,
Abusive behavior, 760                        974
Academic career planning, 692        obstacles, 975
Access, 701, 702                     quality, 977, 978
Accountabilities, 910                standards, 973
Accreditation Association for      Acute cholecystitis (AC), 670
          Ambulatory Health        Adhesive patch, 247
          Care (AAAHC), 433        Administrative registries, 232
Accreditation Council for          Advance Cardiac Life Support
          Graduate Medical                   (ACLS), 795
          Education (ACGME),       Advanced practice providers
          795, 796                           (APPs), 723, 735
  CBME, 147–149                    Advanced Trauma Life Support
  core competencies, 146                     (ATLS), 197, 795
  EPAs, 145, 150–152               Adverse event, 337
  institutional multiple-choice    Agency of Health Quality and
          quizzes, 144                       Research (AHRQ),
  standardized in-training exam              181
          scores, 144              Ambulatory surgery center
  subjective measures, 144                   (ASC), 845
  verifications of proficiency,    American Board of Surgery
          144                                (ABS), 99, 144, 795
Accreditation standards, 108–116   American College of Surgeons
Acetaminophen, 313, 327                      (ACS), 108, 113, 433



© SAGES 2022                                                   1005
J. R. Romanelli et al. (eds.), The SAGES Manual of Quality,
Outcomes and Patient Safety,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94610-4
1006   Index

American Society for Bariatric     Bias, 994, 997
         Surgery (ASBS), 108       Bidirectional, 694
American Society for Enhanced      Bile duct injury, 665, 668, 670,
         Recovery (ASER), 268                 676, 679, 924, 928, 929
American Society for Metabolic     Biliary colic, 851
         and Bariatric Surgery     Biopsychosocial model (BPSM),
         (ASMBS), 108, 110, 113               58
American Society of                “Black box” systems, 248
         Anesthesiologists         Blended debriefing, 578
         (ASA) classification,     Blood pressure, 847
         217                       Briefings, 448
Anticipation, 572                  Burnout, 718, 747, 776, 813, 814,
Apology laws, 588                             821, 822
Appropriate evaluations, 833          institutional/organizational
Area-level PSIs, 482                          support, 823, 824
Assertive language, 449               personal and demographic
Assessment, 795, 799                          factors, 815
Association of periOperative          providing structured
         Registered Nurses                    mentorship, 824
         (AORN), 436                  self-care strategies, 822, 823
Association of Program                workplace/system-related
         Directors in Surgery                 factors, 815–818
         (APDS), 145
Autonomy, 825
Avoidance of complications         C
  checklists to bundles, 376–377   Callouts, 451
  high reliability, 381–383        Career change, 776
  medical errors, 373              Cautery, 462
  morbidity and mortality, 374     Celecoxib, 314
  professionalism and              Center for Human and
         competency, 378–379                  Organizational
  reporting bias, 375–376                     Potential (cHOP), 827
  simulation and skill             Center for Medicare and
         assessment, 380–381                  Medicaid Services
Awareness, 572                                (CMS), 6, 26, 92, 181
                                   Central site, 597
                                   Certification, 615, 627
B                                  Cessation of elective surgery, 841
Bare-below the elbows (BBE),       Child-bearing age, 960
          945                      Cholecystectomy, 664, 665,
Bariatric surgery centers of                  924–929
          excellence (BSCOE)       Chronic liver disease, 215–216
          program, 110             Clinical care pathways, 84, 85
Behavior modeling, 691                best practices, 86–87
                                                       Index   1007

   definition, 79, 80                  football injuries, 59–61
   ERAS protocols, 80                  hernia mesh, 62, 65
   intraoperative protocols, 82        human-computer symbiosis,
   patient outcomes, 80                        71
   postoperative                       learning health system, 68–72
           recommendations, 83         paradigm shift, 56
   preoperative                        PRCT, 55, 56
           recommendations, 81,        problem of suboptimization,
           82                                  66–67
Clinical data registries (CDR),        reductionism, 55
           375                         systems science, 74, 75
Clinical registries, 231               vitamin supplements, 58–59
Closed communication loops, 450     Conflict of interest, 995, 998
Coaching, 577, 687, 688, 691        Consistent teams, 910, 911
Cognitive-behavioral therapy        Contingency planning, 610
           (CBT), 74                Continuing medical education
Cognitive Changes and                          (CME), 817
           Retirement among         Continuous epidural anesthesia,
           Senior Surgeons                     316
           (CCRASS), 797, 798,      Continuous positive airway
           801                                 pressure (CPAP)
Cognitive decline, 797, 802                    devices, 81
Cognitive skills, 804               Continuous quality improvement
Common bile duct (CBD), 924                    (CQI) tools, 63
Common language, 450                Coronary artery bypass grafting
Communication, 565, 910–912,                   (CABG), 703
           961                      COVID-19 pandemic, 54, 608,
Communication and resolution                   708, 843, 851
           programs (CRPs), 364,    Crew Resource Management
           365                                 (CRM), 458
Competency, 638, 649                Crisis, 841–843
Competency-based education,         Critical language, 450
           835, 838                 Critical view of safety (CVS),
Competency-based medical                       925, 927
           education (CBME),        Crohn’s disease, 284
           147–149                  Cross-trained team, 908, 909
Complex adaptive system (CAS),      Cumulative sum (CUSUM)
           541                                 analysis, 400
Complex systems                     Current procedural terminology
   applied to healthcare, 58                   (CPT), 507
   AWR process, 73                  Curriculum-development, 642
   chronic pain after inguinal
           hernia repair, 73–74
   data analytics and data          D
           visualization methods,   Damage control, 850
           65                       Data collection, 567
1008   Index

Data Collection Center, 116             surgical equity, 706, 707
Data registries                         systemic racism, 705, 706
   ACHQC, 98                         Disruptive behavior
   MBSAQIP, 96, 97                      aggressive, 758
   NSQIP, 93–95                         causes, 761
   outcomes, 92                         disruptive physician, 759
   process, 91                          health care environment, 760
   structure, 91                        identify, 767–769
   STS, 92                              impaired physician, 759
Data transparency, 844                  mental and behavioral
da Vinci robotic surgical system,              problems, 759
           900, 901                     multiple factors, 761
Debriefing, 448, 575, 691               passive, 758
   blended, 578                         patient safety, 764–766
   convenience, 581                     performance problems, 759
   distraction, 581                     prevention, 763
   effectiveness, 582                   professional competence, 759
   facilitator, 577                     remediate, 770
   feasibility, 581                  Disruptive physician, 759
   high quality, 578                 Disruptive surgeon, 757
   internally, 579                   Diverticulitis, 851
   intraoperative teaching, 583      Donabedian, A., 4, 180
   learner engagement, 580           Donabedian principles, 91
   medical education, 575, 577       Duty hours, 833–835
   phasic description, 580           Dwight Effect, 178
   post-simulation, 577
   simulation, 578, 582
   systematic, 575                   E
   traditional, 579                  Early adopters, 529
Debriefing assessment for            Economics, 819
           simulation in             EGS Quality Improvement
           healthcare (DASH©),                 Program (EGSQIP),
           582                                 978
Dementia, 802                        Electromyography (EMG), 859
Depression, 776, 778, 780            Electronic health record (EHR),
Diabetes, 958                                  181
Diagnosis-related group (DRG),          effective communication,
           29                                  412–414
Disclosure of adverse events, 588,      leveraging, 409–412
           592                          practices for, 408–409
Disclosure of bad news, 589, 590,    Electronic medical records
           592                                 (EMRs), 66, 717, 720,
Disparities, 701, 702, 708–711                 735, 816
   healthcare access, 702, 703       Electrosurgery, 627
   healthcare delivery, 704, 705     Emergency general surgery
   healthcare quality, 707                     (EGS), 971
                                                        Index    1009

Empathy overload, 778                   education, 870
End-of-life, 961, 962                   environment, 863
Endoscopy, 471                          footwear, 878
Energy safety                           implications, 861, 862
   fire prevention, 472–474             laparoscopic, 865
   FUSE curriculum, 475                 loupes, 877
   laparoscopic and robotic             microbreaks, 875
           surgery, 469–471             operating room, 859, 860, 864,
   open surgery, 467–469                       865
   operating room fires, 472–474        optimal, 862, 863
   unintended defibrillation, 461       surgical instruments, 876, 877
Enhanced recovery after surgery      Error disclosure
           (ERAS), 80, 236, 280,        adverse events, 358
           281, 311–312, 710            regulatory aspects of, 360–362
Enhanced recovery pathways              risk of litigation, 362–363
           (ERP)                        safe practice of, 368
   carbohydrate loading, 283            strategies for, 365–367
   colorectal surgery, 283, 293         taxonomy of error, 359
   competency level steps, 295       Error reduction, 913–915
   elimination of fasting, 283       European Medicines Agency
   evidence-based science, 279                 (EMA), 236
   implementation                    Event-based approach to
       colorectal surgery, 290–291             training (EBAT), 548
       competency, 286–289, 291,     Expectations, 688
           292                       Extraperitoneal ventral hernia
       mastery level, 299–301                  repair (eTEP), 899
       proficiency stage, 293,
           295–297, 299
       SAGES master’s program,       F
           282, 286                  Facial hair, 946
       timeline for, 296             Factor analysis (FA), 65
   metabolic injury and physical     Failure mode and effects analysis
           interventions, 283                   (FMEA), 349–350
   normoglycemia, 283                Feedback, 691
   strict adherence, 285             Financial relationships, 994–996,
   traditional length-of-stay                   998, 999
           patterns, 284             Fishbone diagram, 350
   traditional perioperative care,   Flexibility, 572
           280                       Focused practice designations
Entrustable Professional                        (FPDs), 198
           Activities (EPAs), 145,   Focused professional practice
           150–152, 837                         evaluation (FPPE),
Entrustment, 837                                519
Environmental waste, 947             Football injuries, 59–61
Ergonomics, 817, 857, 858, 879       Footwear, 878
   alleviate strain, 871, 873, 874   Frailty, 216
1010   Index

Fundamentals of Endoscopic        Health technology assessments
          Surgery (FES), 622,              (HTAs), 516
          642, 795                Hernia mesh, 62
   components, 622                Hernia repair
   development, 621, 622            clinical benefits, 889, 890
   validation, 622, 625             costs related to robotic
Fundamentals of Laparoscopic               ventral, 900
          Surgery (FLS), 565,       ergonomics, 889, 901
          606, 607, 614–616,        extraperitoneal ventral hernia
          618–621, 641                     repair, 899
Fundamentals of Robotic             rIPOM, 893–895
          Surgery (FRS), 641        robotic inguinal, 890–892
Fundamental Use of Surgical         robotic pre-peritoneal ventral
          Energy (FUSE)                    hernia repair, 895–897
          curriculum, 197, 462,     robotic ventral, 892
          474, 627–630              surgery, 956
                                    technical enhancement, 889
                                    transversus abdominus
G                                          release, 897, 898
Gabapentinoids, 313               Hospital-acquired conditions
Gallstone disease, 663                     (HACs), 26
Gastrointestinal Endoscopic       Human-computer symbiosis, 71
         Skills (GAGES), 648      Human errors, 336
Gastrointestinal endoscopy, 623
General surgeon on-call
         (GSOC), 972              I
Glasgow Coma Scale, 847           Idea, Development, Exploration,
Goal-concordant care, 962                    Assessment, Long-term
Group purchasing organizations               monitoring (IDEAL)
         (GPOs), 735                         framework, 241–247,
                                             396–399, 509–511
                                  Impaired physician, 759, 763
H                                 Implementation science, 550, 552
Handoffs, 451                     Independence, 837
Hawthorne effect, 8               Inflammatory bowel disease
Headlamps, 877                               (IBD), 704
Healthcare delivery, 704          Information overload, 817
Healthcare disparities, 707       Inpatient quality indicators
Health Care Financing                        (IQI), 181
         Administration           Inpatient Quality Reporting
         (HCFA), 92                          (IQR), 30, 181
Healthcare teams, 538             Input-process-output (IPO)
Health Information Technology                model, 542, 544
         for Economic and             action, 543
         Clinical Health              interpersonal, 543
         (HITECH) Act, 160            transition, 543
                                                          Index    1011

Interpersonal, 543                    Maslach Burnout Inventory -
Intraoperative cholangiography                  Health Sciences Survey
          (IOC), 670, 924, 927                  (MBI-HSS), 820
Intraperitoneal onlay mesh            Material risk, 531
          (IPOM), 892                 Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery
Intravenous lidocaine, 316                      Accreditation and
                                                Quality Improvement
                                                Program (MBSAQIP)
J                                               Registry, 95–97, 119, 126
Just culture, 781, 782                  accreditation standards,
                                                108–116
                                        administrative commitment,
K                                               116
Ketamine, 315                           comprehensive center, 116
Knowledge, skills, and abilities        data surveillance and systems,
        (KSAs), 538                             125–127
                                        education, 129–130
                                        equipment and facility
L                                               accommodations, 120
Laparoscopic surgery, 469–471           monitoring, 119
Laparoscopic cholecystectomy            patient care, 124, 125
           (LC), 386–388, 663, 664,     personnel and services
           924, 928                             resources, 121–124
   BDI, 678, 679                        program scope and
   SAGES                                        governance, 117–120
      acute cholecystitis, 674, 676     quality improvement, 119,
      anatomy, 668, 669                         127–138
      cholangiography, 670, 671         research, 130–138
      critical view of safety,        Medical error, 22
           665–668                      active vs. latent failure, 341
      cutting ductal structures,        adverse events/near misses,
           672–674                              337
Laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric          definitions, 337
           bypass (LRYGB), 135          error analysis, 345, 346
Laparoscopic sleeve                     error-catalyzing factors, 343
           gastrectomies (LSG),         errors of omission, 342
           135                          fishbone diagram, 350
Latent failures, 342                    FMEA, 350
Lead shields, 877                       individual factors, 336
Logistics, 690                          latent failures, 342
                                        prevention of error, 351
                                        root cause analysis, 348
M                                       sentinel events, 338, 339
Magnesium infusion, 315                 surgical never events, 340
Masks, 934                              Swiss cheese model, 344–345
                                        types of, 342–343
1012   Index

Medical malpractice, 732            National Surgical Quality
Medical malpractice stress                   Improvement Program
          syndrome (MMSS),                   (NSQIP), 47, 93–95,
          732                                111, 161, 200, 650
Medico-legal issues, 819            Near miss, 338
Mentor-mentee relationship, 690     Neuraxial anesthesia, 82
Mentorship, 687, 837                “Never events”
Merit-based incentive payment         adverse events, 22
          system (MIPS), 100          CMS, 26–28
Michigan bariatric surgery            DRG, 29–31
          collaborative (MBSC),       medical errors, 22
          112–113                     national quality forum serious
Microbreaks, 875                             reportable events,
MicroCog, 800                                24–28
Minimally invasive surgery            preventing never events,
          (MIS), 281                         31–35
Mitigation, 1000, 1001                SREs, 23
Modified device, 506                  wrong-site surgery, 21
Modified procedure, 506             New device, 506
Modified techniques, 508            New procedure, 506
Monopolar radiofrequency            New technology, 509
          energy, 463, 464            institution level
Montreal Cognitive Assessment                responsibilities, 515
          (MoCA), 800                 surgeon credentialling,
Moral injury, 721                            518–520
Moral insult, 818                     surgeon’s responsibilities,
Morbidity, 958                               511–514
Mortality, 853, 958                   surgical societies, 525–528
Motivation, 825                     Next accreditation system
Multidisciplinary evaluation, 806            (NAS), 144
Multidisciplinary rounds, 454       N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)
Multiple comorbidities, 959                  glutamate receptors,
Multiple enhanced recovery after             315
          surgery (ERAS)            Nontechnical errors, 561
          guidelines, 326

                                    O
N                                   Obesity, 957
National Cancer Database            Obesity medicine director
          (NCDB), 99                          (OMD), 118
National Football League (NFL)      Obstacles
          injuries, 59                learning curves, 604
National Institute of Health          technological limitations, 605
          (NIH), 53                 Operating room (OR), 539, 551,
National Quality Forum (NQF),                 843, 846, 849
          184, 419                    black box, 50
National Science Foundation           efficiency, 911
          (NSF), 53                   emergency operations, 435
                                                       Index    1013

  Five Steps to Safer Surgery,      Patient education, 312–313
          428                       Patient ownership, 988
  fix system-wide errors, 420       Patient protection and
  foreign bodies, 420                         Affordable Care Act of
  general anesthesia, 426                     2010, 225
  listening and acknowledging,      Patient-Reported Outcome
          436                                 Measurement System
  post-traumatic stress disorder,             (PROMIS), 235
          429                       Patient-reported outcome
  preoperative checklist, 433                 measures (PROMs),
  retained foreign bodies, 420                235–240
  sentinel event, 420                  abdominal surgery, 266–267
  surgical checklists and              absence of complications, 260
          timeouts, 434                assessment of measurement
  system-wide flaws, 423                      properties, 263–266
  training, 917, 918                   consensus recommendations,
  Universal Protocol, 426, 433                268–273
  utilization of checklists, 434       electronic systems, 269
  verbal communication, 436            ePROMs’ design, 272
  wrong site surgery, 420, 423         generic PROMs, 262
Operating room attire, 933, 934,       traditional approach, 260
          939, 951                  Patient-reported outcomes
  ACS 2017, 939, 940                          (PROs), 234
  AORN 2015, 936–938                Patient safety, 545
  CDC 2017, 940                        complimentary roles, 457, 458
  cost, 946, 947                       effective communication, 443,
  COVID-19, 948                               445
  environmental waste, 947             failed communication, 445
  facial hair, 946                     fundamental and pervasive
  surgical head coverings, 942,               issues, 445–447
          944                          RRT, 455, 456
  surgical masks, 944                  structured communication,
  types, 935, 936                             448–455
  WHO 2018, 940, 941                   teamwork, 443
Operative skills, 797, 802          Patient safety indicators (PSI)
Operative time, 833                    limitations, 485–486
Opioid medications, 328                quality and surgical outcomes,
Optimization, 908                             483–484
Organizational culture, 825            quality measures, 479–483
                                    Pediatric Medical Advisor
                                              (PMA), 118
P                                   PerOral Endoscopic Myotomy
Palliation, 962                               (POEM), 513
PaO2/FiO2 ratio, 847                Perceptions, 836
Papillary thyroid, 852              Perfectionism, 778
Patient-borne cost, 183             Performance analysis, 691
1014   Index

Perioperative pain management        Physician disruptive behavior,
   chronic opioid use, 331                     764
   intercostal block, 325            Plasma energy, 466–467
   intraoperative measures,          Platelet count, 847
           314–326                   Poor ergonomics, 860
   intraperitoneal lidocaine, 326    Positive psychology, 826
   lateral approach, 320             Postoperative hemorrhage or
   local wound infiltration, 325               hematoma (PHH), 485
   morbid obesity, 331               Post-traumatic stress disorder
   postoperative measures,                     (PTSD), 732, 776
           326–331                   Press and Ganey surveys, 235
   preoperative measures,            Prevention quality indicators
           312–314                             (PQI), 181
   quadratus lumborum blocks,        Principal component analysis
           318                                 (PCA), 65
   rectus block, 324–325             Proctors, 522, 523
   subcostal approach, 320           Proficiency-based training, 637,
   TAP blocks, 321, 322                        638, 640, 641, 647
   TF block, 323                        FES, 642
Perioperative quality initiative        FLS, 641, 643
           (POQI), 268                  historical perspective, 638, 639
Perioperative risk assessment           integrating simulation, 647,
   biochemical, hematologic and                648
           nutritional evaluation,      lessons from psychology, 645,
           210–211                             647
   cardiac considerations,              proficiency verification, 652,
           213–215                             653
   chronic liver disease, 215–216       residency training, 650, 651
   frailty, 216                         SBML, 644
   high-value preoperative care,        surgical simulation, 639, 640
           207–208                   PROM-cycle framework,
   obesity, 215                                238–240
   physical exam and, 209–210        Prospective, randomized,
   pulmonary complications, 212                controlled trial
   revised cardiac risk index, 213             (PRCT), 55
   risk assessment tools, 216–217    Prostate, 852
   standards of care, 217–219        Provider-level PSIs, 482
   surgical urgency, 211
Personal activities, 835
Personalities, 688                   Q
Pharmacy benefit managers            Quadratus lumborum (QL)
           (PBMs), 735                         block, 318
Phasic description, 580              Quality, 609, 933, 938, 941
Physician autonomy, 736              Quality improvement (QI), 816
Physician consortium for               clinical areas, 170–171
           performance                 COVID patients, 172
           enhancement (PCPI),         fundamental components of,
           184                                 156
                                                     Index    1015

  history of, 157–161             Rapid visual information
  identification of key                     processing test (RVIP),
          stakeholders                      801
      composite, 162              “RE-AIM” method, 167
      leadership team, 164–167    Receptor blockade, 313–314
      multidisciplinary effort,   Redeployment, 841
          163                     Red rules, 454
      outcome, 162                Reductionism, 55
      process, 162                Reductionist science paradigm,
      range of departments and              57
          individuals, 162        Rehabilitation, 807
      structure, 162              Reliable testing, 833
  patient outcomes, 156           Remote patient management,
  prevention, 168–170                       603
Quality metrics, 180              Remote site, 597
  benchmarking to quality         Renal failure, 853
          improvement, 178        Reporting bias, 375–376
  checklist for, 184–188          Residual heat, 468
  conceptualization phase, 185    Resilience, 737, 826
  cost, 183                       Resources In Surgical Education
  evaluation, 188                           (RISE), 151
  implementation stage, 187       Respiratory failure, 853
  institutional databases, 181    Responsibilities, 910
  local and regional              Robotic intraperitoneal onlay
          collaborative data-­              mesh (rIPOM), 893
          sharing programs, 181   Robotic surgery, 469–471, 835
  metric construction, 179        Robotic TAR (rTAR), 897
  national datasets, 181          Robotic technology, 389–391
  NQF-endorsed quality            Robotic transabdominal
          measure, 186                      pre-peritoneal
  patient-centric surgical                  (rTAPP), 890
          outcome, 189–191        Root cause analysis (RCA), 348,
  patient safety, 182                       349
  perioperative temperature
          management, 186
  preventing points, 177          S
  scoring points, 177             Safety culture
  testing, 187                       barriers, 492, 495
  tool for, 189–190                  communication disconnects,
Quality of life (QoL), 224, 679             493
                                     complexity of surgical
                                            services, 494–495
R                                    definition, 491
Ramifications, 841                   event reporting and
Randomized control trials                   promotion, 496
         (RCT), 934                  hierarchy in, 492
Rapid response team (RRT),           standardized communication,
         455, 456                           496
1016   Index

Safety culture (cont.)             Smoking, 957
   surgical leadership, 497–498    Society of American
   team dynamics, 493–494                     Gastrointestinal and
   teamwork, 497                              Endoscopic Surgeons
Safety initiatives, 833                       (SAGES), 461, 504, 516,
SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus                        664, 994, 996, 998, 1000
           pandemic, 115              leadership, 462
Scale-based evaluations, 148          master’s program framework,
Scarce resource allocation, 841,              280, 282
           846–848                    modified device, 506
Second victim phenomenon, 776,        modified procedure, 506
           777, 785–787               new device, 506
   addressing challenges, 787         new procedure, 506
   depression, 779                 Society of Thoracic Surgery
   empathy overload, 778                      (STS), 92–93, 518
   female gender, 779              Socioeconomic status, 701, 702
   Just culture, 781, 782          Space, 591
   network of support, 783, 784    Specialization, 985, 987–989
   perfectionism, 778              Specialized model, 987
   substance abuse, 779            Staff, 591
   training, 779                   Standards for Commercial
Security, 609                                 Support (SCS), 995
Self-assessment, 515               Standards for Integrity and
Self-regulation, 515                          Independence (SII),
Sentinel events, 338, 339                     995
Sepsis, 67                         STOP-bang questionnaire for
“Serious reportable event”                    obstructive sleep
           (SRE), 22, 420                     apnea, 218
Simulation, 563, 589, 609          Stretching, 871, 874
   advantage, 563                  Structured communications, 455
   communication, 563              Sub-specialization, 986, 987
   environment, 563                Subtotal cholecystectomy, 677
   limitations, 570                Suicidality, 776
   robotic surgery, 569            Super-specialization, 986, 989
   team training, 565, 568, 569    Supplies, 591
   technical skills, 563           Support, 591
Simulation-based mastery           Surgeon decline, 793
           learning (SBML), 644    Surgeon learning curve, 400–401
Simulation-based training (SBT),   Surgeon scorecard, 15
           547                     Surgeon wellness, 715–717, 719,
Single-dose administration, 317               720, 749–752
Situation, Background,                cognitive overload, 728–730
           Assessment,                EMRs, 740–744
           Recommendation             leadership perspective,
           (SBAR), 452                        744–747
Skull caps, 936, 937, 943             medical malpractice, 730–732
                                                        Index    1017

   moral injury, 721                Surgical innovation, 504
   physician autonomy, 733, 734,    Surgical leadership, 497–498
          736                       Surgical never events, 340
   resilience, 737–739              Surgical outcomes, 688, 690
   victim blaming, 722                 administrative registries, 232
   work burden, 723–727                clinical registries, 231
Surgical care                          effective outcome
   composite, 9                               measurement, 240, 241
   hospital, and network quality,      IDEAL framework, 242–247
          15–17                        large nationwide standardized
   outcomes, 7, 8                             databases, 227–230
   patient-reported outcomes, 10       multidisciplinary action, 226
   processes of care, 6, 7             outcome, 226
   quality measurement, 12–15          patient safety indicators,
   right measurement approach,                233–234
          10–12                        Press and Ganey surveys, 235
   structure of, 4–6                   process, 226
Surgical care improvement              PROMs, 236–240
          project (SCIP), 6, 48,       PROs, 234
          91, 180                      structure, 225
Surgical dashboard                     surgical accountability, 224
   characteristics, 43, 44          Surgical quality, 841
   checklists, 42                   Surgical review corporation
   dashboard metrics                          (SRC), 110
       hospital admissions data,    Surgical site infection (SSI), 934,
          47                                  957
       NSQIP, 47–48                 Surgical societies
       patient mortality, 45           clinical guidelines, 195
       patient safety indicators,      databases, 200
          46                           directed education programs,
       postoperative                          199
          complications, 46            high-quality guidelines, 197
       productivity, 45                randomized control trials, 196
   graphical data, 42               Surgical techniques, 509
   quality improvement, 48–51       Surgical technology
   real-time feedback, 42              IDEAL framework, 396–399
Surgical education, 687                innovation
Surgical energy                            definition, 391–392
   bipolar, 465                            evaluation of, 392–396
   cautery, 462                        laparoscopic cholecystectomy,
   monopolar radiofrequency                   386–388
          energy, 463, 464             robotic technology, 389–391
   plasma energy, 466–467              surgeon learning curve,
   ultrasonic devices, 465, 466               400–401
Surgical environment, 688           Surgical telementoring programs
Surgical equity, 707                          (STMPs), 605
1018   Index

Surgical training, 833–835          Telesurgery, 599
Sustainability, 591                 Thromboembolic events, 853
Swiss cheese model, 344–345         Total bilirubin, 847
Systematic debriefing, 575          Total extraperitoneal (TEP), 645
Systemic racism, 705                Total intravenous anesthesia
Systems science, 57, 74, 75                    (TIVA), 315
                                    Tramadol, 328
                                    Transabdominal pre-peritoneal
T                                              (TAPP), 895
Team development interventions      Transanal total mesorectal
          (TDIs), 545–547, 549                 excision (TaTME), 244
Team dynamics, 493                  Transdermal lidocaine, 327
Team format factors                 Transfuse, 563
   communication, 911, 912          Transition, 543
   error reduction, 913–915         Transversalis fascia (TF) block,
   OR efficiency, 916                          322, 323
Team science, 540                   Transversus abdominis muscle
Team training, 538, 565, 567–570,              (TAM), 321
          572                       Transversus abdominus plane
Teamwork, 537, 565                             (TAP) blocks, 82, 319
   complex adaptive system, 541     Transversus abdominus release
   healthcare, 538–540                         (TAR) approach, 73,
   input-process-output, 542                   897
   simulation-based training, 548   Trauma Quality Improvement
   successful implementation,                  Project (TQIP), 978
          550, 551
Technology and Value
          Assessment Committee      U
          (TAVAC), 516              Ultrasonic devices, 465, 466
Telecommunications, 596             Ultrasound-guided transversus
Teleconsultant, 602                          abdominis plane (TAP)
Telehealth, 598                              blocks, 319, 321
Telematics, 598                     United States Medical Licensing
Telemedicine, 597, 603                       Examination
Telementee, 601                              (USMLE), 588
Telementor, 601                     US Food and Drug
Telementoring, 522, 524, 600,                Administration (FDA),
          605–607, 694                       528
Telemonitor, 602
Telemonitoring, 601
Telepreceptee, 600                  V
Telepreceptor, 599                  Validation, 616
Telepreceptorship, 599              Venous thromboembolism
Teleproctor, 600                              (VTE), 51
Teleproctorship, 600                Victim blaming, 716
Telestration, 598
                                                    Index      1019

Video-based assessment (VBA),     Wisdom, 695
          199, 651                Withdraw of care, 963, 965
Virtual reality (VR), 570         Workload distribution, 567
Visual learning, 804              Work-related MSK disorder
Visual Paired Associates                   (WR-MSKD), 857
          Learning (VPAL) test,
          801
Vitamin supplements, 58–59        Z
                                  Zone of proximal development
                                           (ZPD), 646
W
Wellness, 817, 858
